Essays and Reviews
Plato Today, by R.H.S. Crossman
Twenty-five years ago Plato’s Republic was generally viewed as one of the noblest monuments of Western liberalism and enlightenment. Together with the funeral speech which Thucydides in his history put into the mouth of Pericles, it was thought to represent the summit of Greek political wisdom and moral aspiration, and thus to be a primer and inspiration for the rulers and chief administrators who drew their education from the classics. This view of Plato’s politics has not entirely disappeared, and no doubt still gets an occasional airing at public-school speech days; but effectively it has gone, shown up for the extraordinary tissue of historical falsehood and philosophical misunderstanding that it always was. Its disappearance from serious discussion is in this country chiefly associated with Professor Popper’s massive engine of destruction, The Open Society and Its Enemies; but already in 1937 it had suffered a good deal of damage from the lighter, but still telling, weapons which Mr. Crossman deployed in his Plato Today.1 This ingenious and stimulating book has now happily been re-issued, with a few changes and a brief new introduction in which Crossman disarmingly gives his reasons for not changing more.
The oddest thing about the once popular view of Plato is that anyone should have believed it. It needed less knowledge of Greek history than was possessed by Plato’s admirers to realise that Platonic political theory represents not the finest philosophical expression of Athenian ideals, but a violent reaction against Athenian democracy and Pericles. Moreover, it needed only a reading of the Republic itself, or so one would have thought, to recognise the political system recommended there as a sclerotic monstrosity, high-principled in intent, but ultimately—and explicitly—based on oligarchic deceit and a contempt for much legitimate aspiration and human diversity. That well-informed and humane persons should have mistaken this either for an ideal embodiment of the principles of the Periclean Funeral Speech, or for a decent form of human life, is surprising.
The first, historical, mistake is chiefly explained, as Crossman remarks, by the refusal to think historically about Plato’s political ideas at all. Part of Crossman’s book is concerned with filling in the historical background, particularly of Plato’s life. It is vividly done; scholarly eyebrows will be raised over some of it, but the main points are firmly made, and one comes out with a genuine understanding of Greek politics. More general doubts may be felt about Crossman’s treatment of Socrates. He anticipates the line taken by Popper: that Socrates, unlike Plato, was a genuine ‘democrat’, an anti-authoritarian questioner who was executed for making a nuisance of himself to the tyrannically complacent. This may be true, but it is harder to prove historically than Crossman or Popper allows. We know that Socrates was associated with an anti-democratic clique, and that his execution was connected with this. Admitting as much, Crossman argues both that Socrates was a democrat and, indeed, a saint, and that the democratic faction which executed him was politically justified in doing so. This curious piece of jugglery seems indicative of more than merely historical uncertainty.
On the question of Plato’s political reputation—why his system should have been thought admirable by people who ought to have known better—Crossman has interesting things to say, both directly and indirectly. Directly, he suggests that a lot of people shrugged off Plato’s more repellent proposals by saying that they were the solutions of an idealist who did not consider the weaknesses of human nature; whereas, as Crossman admirably shows, Plato was obsessively aware of the weaknesses of human nature, and devised his rigid hierarchical structure precisely because he thought there was no other way of disciplining them. Crossman does not underestimate the power and subtlety of Plato’s pessimistic vision. It would have been interesting if he had gone on to discuss Plato’s theory of human nature, and to say something about the complex ways in which this theory allows Plato to represent as a system of consent what must actually be, on his own premises, a system of coercion.
Indirectly, Crossman points to other roots of the traditional admiration for the Republic when, in the non-historical part of his book, he imaginatively presents Plato’s views on such subjects as British democracy and British education, and suggests that these institutions are more Platonic in inspiration than may appear on the surface. He might profitably have added a Platonic estimate of Britain’s mission in the colonies. These parts of the book, in which ‘Plato’ is made to comment on twentieth-century problems, have lost little of their sparkle in twenty years. Some of it is fairly brittle, and Crossman is inclined to subscribe to what might be called the Gallic fallacy, of supposing that political institutions do not stand up to ‘rigorous logic’, when all that has been shown is that they do not stand up to rigorous logic proceeding from inadequate premises. But it is all provocative in the best sense—provocative of thought.
The book ends with an epilogue in which Crossman gives his own views on the Platonic issues of democracy and authority. It is brief and ultimately elusive; it combines in a dizzying way a virtually anarchical radicalism with a fascinated respect for the facts of power. There is an unresolved tension here—the same, surely, as broke out in the convoluted estimate of Socrates’ death. One wonders whether this book, which has in no way dated, shows us not only Plato, but Crossman today.2
Notes
1. Plato Today, by R.H.S. Crossman, MP, rev. ed. (Allen and Unwin, 1959).
2. This review originally appeared as “Disbanding the Republic,” Spectator, July 31, 1959.
Richard Crossman was a prominent British Labour Party politician, writer, and editor who served in Harold Wilson’s government from 1968 to 1970.
English Philosophy since 1900, by G. J. Warnock
It is only in its title that this notably unpretentious book promises more than it gives.1 It is not a general account of English philosophy since 1900, as it omits moral and political philosophy altogether, and in other fields deals with the work of comparatively few philosophers, and that selectively. These limitations, however, are clearly stated by Mr. Warnock, who explains that his aim has been “to make as clear as possible the general character of the philosophical landscape”, and that he has deliberately given brief treatment to subjects, such as Logical Atomism, which have been studied recently in other works. The result of these various restrictions is a spare, elegant little book, admirably clear and very well written.
Its simplicity and clarity, however, are not the products only of restricted concerns and expository skill. It has the basic straightforwardness of a moral tale. At the start we are presented with the macabre picture of British Idealism, intellectually corrupt, fraudulent, staggering to its end in delusions of grandeur. Coming from foreign places, its rule was never more than the tyranny of occupation; and the rise of the hero, Moore, to drive it out is an affirmation not only of the light against the dark but of the native against the exotic. In the ensuing struggles, Moore has his allies, not always reliable: Russell, brave but unsteady; Positivism, secretly in love with the metaphysical enemy. The epic of Wittgenstein is also told, not without a slight sense of strain at having to take so extravagant a figure so seriously. With Ryle, victorious peace is almost achieved; and the story ends with Common Sense again on the throne, and the citizens of Oxford, calm but not idle, earning the unambitious rewards of honest toil.
It should be said that Mr. Warnock’s account is not quite as simple as this, and certainly the main divergences between the philosophers he considers are sharply observed and clearly set down. Yet, as he warns us, his preferences are not concealed; it is Moore, and Moore as the defender of Common Sense, who emerges as the most original and important contributor to recent philosophy, and it is in terms of this judgment that the whole account is given. The presuppositions behind this judgment also emerge very distinctly, and it is perhaps the nature of these, and the frankness with which they are revealed, that give the book its undoubted interest and, in a sense, appeal.
The basic presupposition is that metaphysical theses, and even metaphysical perplexity, are always the products, direct or indirect, of theorists, either philosophical or scientific. In a natural state, unharried by theorists, we all hold the “Common Sense view of the world”, which is (as Mr. Warnock says Moore found it to be) “perfectly unsurprising, undistressing, quite certainly true” (p. 55). Indeed, it seems that even the activities of theorists can never more than momentarily upset this view of the world: “It appears to me most evidently true that, in its simple foundations, our ordinary ‘way of seeing’ the world is absolutely stable and obstinately unshakeable … It is doubtful how far even Berkeley was able to retain the full sense of his vision for more than an occasional moment; one cannot so easily shake off what is natural to one’s species” (p. 142). One result of this is that persons who claim seriously to be metaphysically disturbed are likely to be either in an unbalanced state or, quite possibly, insincere; those who are not will be relieved to learn that “to practise philosophy in the manner of Moore, it is not necessary to have (as most of us doubtless have not) nor to pretend to have (as some at least would be unwilling to do) large-scale metaphysical anxieties” (p. 55). This view of the origin and nature of metaphysical disturbance is a parallel—one might almost say, a recurrence—of a Rousseauesque view of the natural man corrupted by the machinations of priests and kings.
Now one might admit that in the matter of metaphysical scepticism about such things as the existence of the external world, there is something in the Moorean claim that no sane person seriously doubts the truth of “common-sense” beliefs. But even in this sort of case, it is most implausible to suggest that the origin of metaphysical doubts lies in the activities of theorists. For instance, Mr. Warnock considers the metaphysical view of the mind (closely related to scepticism about the external world) as a “man inside”. He mentions, and rejects, the idea that the roots of this view lie already in the structure of our ordinary language about the mind, and finds a ready diagnosis of the trouble in a misunderstanding of the findings of neurophysiology and a tendency to assimilate the workings of the nervous system to the familiar workings of a telephone exchange. This diagnosis is absurd. For “the man inside” is already there with Descartes, and (though he was not worried by solipsism) as good as there with Plato—neither of whom—not even Descartes—was driven to the picture by reflections on neurophysiology, nor, one supposes, the telephone exchange. Of course, both were “theorists”; but the naturalness of such a picture for Plato, and the apparent cogency of Descartes’ meditations, might suggest that “the man inside” is something which they found as theorists rather than invented. It is surely not irrelevant in this connection that the belief in some sort of human soul, possibly separable from the body, seems to be about as old as the human race, and so, presumably, not younger than “common sense”. The idea, however, that there is naturally a problem about consciousness, and that “the man inside” is a picture naturally associated with this problem and lurking even in common sense, is not sympathetic to Mr. Warnock.
It is not clear how far Mr. Warnock confines the “priests and kings” thesis to such matters as the existence of the external world. At some points he seems to suggest that any form of “large-scale metaphysical anxiety” is gratuitous; elsewhere he admits that there are periods when at least some forms of metaphysical anxiety would be at least not patently insincere. The present time, however, is not one of them. In a chapter where he considers and seeks to justify a lack of metaphysical disturbance among present Oxford-style philosophers, he mentions the previous associations of metaphysics and religion, and goes on to say: “(metaphysics) could be expected to show some decline when very many people neither have, nor appear to be much oppressed by the want of, any serious religious convictions … Metaphysics, like religion, ought not to be manufactured in deference to any supposed requirements of intellectual decorum, or in the pursuit of some once genuine fervour which, in present conditions, would be synthetic or simulated” (p. 145). These are honourable remarks, inasmuch as, if there is nothing to be worried about, it is certainly dishonourable to simulate worry. Their suggestion, however, seems to be that there is at present nothing to be metaphysically worried about: if this were not the suggestion, the statement that many people are not worried would be merely irrelevant, and no justification of metaphysical inactivity would have been given. And this suggestion is downright astonishing. In fact the whole underlying thesis of this book is astonishing; all the more so for the air with which Mr. Warnock presents it, as one soberly recognizing obvious truths which incomprehensibly escape the notice of others.
It is unhappily probable that some readers, particularly among the unprofessional audience for whom the book is chiefly intended, may be tempted, in their puzzlement at this attitude, to diagnose it merely as a certain parochial and academic complacency. This uncharitable reaction would be over-hasty: the sensitivity with which the book is written, the acuteness of its reasoning, and its moral overtones, all demand some deeper characterization of its implausibility. Such a characterization really awaits a proper study of the concept of “common sense” and of the peculiar role it plays in some contemporary philosophy. However, one might say in general that what the attitude of Mr. Warnock’s book is most like is that of a work of metaphysics; there is much the same difference between this attitude and complacency as there is between Leibniz and Pangloss. As in some works of metaphysics, notable intelligence is deployed in distorting the facts of human experience to fit an extremely simple view of human nature, science, and philosophy. It would be unfair not to add that, like such works, the present book derives from this activity a genuine unity and even a certain fascination.2
Notes
1. English Philosophy since 1900, by G. J. Warnock (Oxford University Press, 1958).
2. Originally published in Philosophy, 1959, © Cambridge University Press. Reprinted with permission.
Thought and Action, by Stuart Hampshire
The chief and persistent influence on British philosophical thought about the human mind has been Descartes. To say this may seem a paradox, since there is no more hallowed contrast in the history of philosophy than that between on the one hand the rationalism of Descartes, with its far-reaching trust in the powers of pure theoretical reason to discover the ultimate structure of reality, and on the other hand the profound empiricist strain of British thought, which has again and again returned to the view that nothing substantial can be learned about the world save through the laborious, tentative, and always corrigible process of generalising from sense-experience and empirical observation.
Nor is this hallowed contrast confined to abstract philosophical opinions about the nature of science. It is equally a platitude—though a much vaguer one—to contrast a certain abstract and theoretical spirit more generally present in French thought with the more cautious, down-to-earth, and perhaps pedestrian temper of English intellectual activities. These contrasts are of course very rough and ready, and, in their more general form, a great deal of rubbish has been talked about them by both the contrasted parties. For all that, there is something in this platitudinous distinction; how then can it be that the prevailing influence on British philosophy of mind is nevertheless Descartes?
There are three main ways, I think, in which it is so. First, British philosophers have constantly returned to Descartes’ fundamental belief, that the mind is in some fundamental sense distinct from the body, and that knowledge of the mind, its contents and activities, is more direct than, and is not reached through, our knowledge of the “external” world, where included in the external world are our bodies. This belief, in different forms, is to be found in the three pillars of British empiricism, Locke, Berkeley, and Hume, and once more in the logical positivism famously expounded in A. J. Ayer’s Language, Truth, and Logic. It is only recently that this belief has been fundamentally challenged, in, for instance, Gilbert Ryle’s Concept of Mind and the later work of Wittgenstein.
The second point of contact between the British tradition and Descartes is rather different. It lies in their common neglect of, indeed contempt for, history as a form of human knowledge, and of historical understanding as a vital part of man’s understanding of his world. Although the British tradition differed from Descartes about the nature and methods of natural science, it shared his belief that natural science was the paradigm of human knowledge. Natural science seeks, and seems able to attain, knowledge of universal truths about the world, which hold irrespective of time and place; compared with this, historical study, immersed in the unsystematically particular, may seem a poor thing.
The third point of contact is to be found in a comparable neglect of æsthetics. For Descartes, our experience of art could scarcely appear as a form of knowledge or rational activity at all, and he accordingly has nothing to say of it. The poverty of British æsthetics, at least among philosophers, is notorious. This point is certainly connected with the last, and it is significant that the two British thinkers who are outstanding exceptions to the prevailing neglect of history—Burke and Collingwood—are exceptional also in having serious views about the nature of art. Of course, there is an important difference between the neglect of these things by Descartes, and their continuing neglect by the British tradition: the latter needs explanation, while the former scarcely does. Descartes, a scientist and mathematician in the 17th century, was almost bound to take such a view; what is odd is that in Britain it should persist so indomitably to the present day. I suspect that the explanation constitutes a rather engaging paradox of the history of ideas: it is precisely the empirical and cautious temper of British philosophers that has left them in this curious, perhaps not entirely recognised, alliance with the rationalist Descartes. The elevation of historical understanding and æsthetic experience to central places in the picture of man’s consciousness took place, after all, amid the deep metaphysical thunder of 19th-century Germany, above all in Hegel. While the influence of Hegel radically changed the rest of European thought, and continues to work in it, the sceptical caution of British philosophy left it spectacularly immune to it—splendidly, but to its undoubted loss.
It is necessary, I think, to bear in mind these continuing Cartesian characteristics of the British philosophy of mind to appreciate fully the originality of Stuart Hampshire’s book.1 It is not just that he adopts an anti-Cartesian view of mind and body: this has been seen recently, in the work of Wittgenstein and elsewhere (although Hampshire’s own views take an importantly different direction from most of what has appeared). More immediately remarkable, at least, is the way in which his book runs against the other two traditions. Throughout the book Hampshire shows that he regards historical understanding as essential to grasping all but the absolutely basic characteristics of the human mind. There are some features of human thought that are basic and essential, those that follow from man’s nature as a bodily creature in a world of solid objects, who can move and act in this world, and communicate with others of his kind with whom he lives in society. Beyond this minimum, however (and one of Hampshire’s chief concerns is to determine what this minimum is), the forms that human thought takes, the structure of language, the content of morality, the styles of art, are to be understood historically. All our ways of thinking about the world are conditioned by a given historical context of conventions, manners, and interests; hence also they inevitably change. Thus in anything that concerns human thought and achievement, there are, if any, very few final truths. Hampshire is prepared, indeed, to take the step, not common with philosophers, of applying this conclusion to his own theories: all “determinations of the powers of the mind,” any theoretical picture of the nature and interdependence of human capabilities and characteristics, must be provisional, his own not excepted.
This concern for the historical dimension runs, though not always obviously, all through the book. His concern for æsthetics is equally deep, but shows itself only towards the end of the book, where he makes it clear that in his view no philosophical theory of mind can be complete unless it gives some account of the universal human desire to produce and appreciate works of art.
Thought and Action covers a large range of topics, from the nature of language and linguistic reference, via the nature of intention and intentional action, to the freedom of the will and morality. In this, too, it is distinguished from much contemporary British work. Hampshire writes in his introduction:
It has been the discipline of this time to answer separable questions separately, to analyse complex difficulties into elementary difficulties. The rewards of this discipline have been very great: accuracy, clarity, and sometimes even conclusiveness. But it is possible that there are purposes and interests which require that accurate and step-by-step analysis should not always be preferred to a more general survey and more tentative opinions, even in philosophy.
Such a general survey he attempts, and the result is a book of extraordinary sweep, often sketchy and tentative in the connections of its argument, but rich in the variety and novelty of the considerations it assembles.
The free and diverse moment of its thought makes this an exciting and stimulating book; it does not, however, make a book notably easy to digest or summarise. Nor is it made any easier in these respects by the way in which the exposition is put together. The style is extremely graceful, but its literary merits go with a refusal to use the more ponderous devices of footnote and reference which, like metal spikes in mountain-climbing, may be inelegant but do help one over the steep places. In the first chapter, for instance, a number of pages are devoted to arguments which are in fact objections to views held about perception by the logical positivists and similar thinkers, but there is nothing in the text to tell one this. It would also have been helpful, I think, to get us to see the direction of his views, had Hampshire made references to writers whose opinions on various topics he either shares or has been interestingly influenced by. Some of what he says about action and self-knowledge, for instance, bears important relations to some French writing which has not previously had much effect in this country: to Sartre and, in particular, Merleau-Ponty, among contemporaries, and to an earlier tradition going back to Maine de Biran.
Hampshire’s austerity in such matters extends also to the devices of cross-reference, sub-heading, and so on; the book is a painting rather than a blue-print, a plant and not an engine. The argument grows, winds, doubles back; and, like a tendril, it tends to proceed spirally, returning to a side of the question it has visited before, but now a little further on. Its direction is not always easily followed, but it has a direction.
The general direction is, very roughly put, something like this. Hampshire starts from the question of what it is for us to be able to talk about the world, and finds as necessary for this our ability to pick out and refer to enduring objects in our environment. What sorts of distinctions we make, and what sorts of similarities we perceive, between features of the environment will to a great extent be a product of society, convention, and history; but that we do identify and refer to enduring objects is a necessary part of our having a language at all. In all these opening sections in particular, Hampshire’s argument can be seen as revolving round the old distinction between what is “natural” and what is “conventional”; the possibility of language has a natural basis in the activity of pointing, but so long as this basic pointing function is preserved, the forms of a particular language will be conventional.
Hampshire then goes on to argue, in a number of interestingly different ways, that the possibility of language, and so of any conscious thought, presupposes that the beings who use the language should be able to move and act in the world. Here he rejects an important Cartesian idea, that we could image a conscious being whose experience was purely passive, who was a mere recipient of experiences. Such a being, for Hampshire, could not think about or have any concept of his experiences, for mere experiences could not satisfy the conditions of reference and identification necessary for conscious thought. (Here it is that Hampshire argues against the logical positivists; some of his arguments are similar to later views of Wittgenstein.2) In order to be able to identify and refer, we must be able to perceive enduring objects distinct from ourselves; the notion of perceiving presupposes that of being able to perceive things from different points of view—for it is precisely this that distinguishes genuine perception from illusion. The notion of perceiving things from different points of view presupposes, in turn, the idea that I can move about in the world, and orientate myself, as a bodily object, in relation to other objects.
The idea of moving myself is then taken up and connected with the notions of action and intention. These notions are, in Hampshire’s view—here again a radical departure from Cartesianism—connected with my ability to have direct knowledge of what I am doing or trying to do: “it is essential to the idea of an action,” he writes, “that a person’s knowledge that an action of his is his own action is not the conclusion of an inference.” This knowledge that I have of what I am doing, though in certain cases it may indeed be minimal, is always with me when I am conscious. If someone is conscious, then there is always an answer to the question “what is he doing?”; and a man’s own knowledge of what he is doing, not merely in some instantaneous sense, but in the sense of a project in which he is engaged which reaches out beyond the present moment, is the foundation of a man’s consciousness of his own identity. (Here Hampshire comes particularly close to phenomenological thinkers such as Merleau-Ponty.)
From this point, two lines of thought in particular are taken up. First, some connections are explored between the idea of action and that of thinking or more generally having conscious psychological experiences. So far from the latter being contrasted with action, as it always has been in the Cartesian tradition, Hampshire finds the two to be intimately connected. So far from an emotion, for instance, being a merely passive experience which may, as a matter of fact, lead to or cause overt action, it is rather, according to Hampshire, a kind of inhibited action; the emotion of anger, for instance, is to be understood as a by-product of the activity, itself rather sophisticated, of stopping myself lashing out or something similar. Similarly, the “psychological state” of belief is to be understood as a kind of inhibited assertion. (These somewhat paradoxical statements may be an oversimplification of Hampshire’s view. I suspect, however, that the view as it stands is in any case rather paradoxical.)
The second line of thought pursued from here is an exploration of the notion of “practical knowledge” and its connections with intention. Hampshire holds, if I understand him, that there are two sorts of such knowledge. One is a certain “non-propositional” knowledge, which a man has when he knows what he is going to do or, more particularly, how he is going to do something, but has no words in which he could describe this. Thus an actor, for instance, may know how he means to play his part in the sense that he can show you how he does it, and can recognise if it has failed to come off, but could not describe how he was going to do it. The other sort is propositional: a man can tell you what he is going to do, in the form of a definite statement of intention.
Statements of intention are contrasted with predictions of what a man will do, and it is argued that there is a sense in which the two cannot be combined: a man cannot intend to do a certain thing if he knows on independent grounds, say some considerations of psychology, that he is going to do the thing anyway. This consideration introduces a doctrine of freedom. I am free, roughly speaking, in so far as my actual actions match my genuine intentions and projects. In particular, the neurotic is not free, since he is constantly frustrated in what he is consciously trying to bring about. In his case, this is because there is something else which in a rather different, subconscious sense, he is trying to do; the way to liberation is through an increased self-consciousness which it is the aim of psycho-analysis to bring about. Here Hampshire (like Spinoza, on whom he earlier wrote a book3) connects the idea of freedom with that of self-knowledge, and, by connecting this notion with the doctrines of Freud, tries to give an interpretation of free and responsible action which will avoid the difficulties and obscurities of the bare notion of the freedom of the will, as it has been inherited from Kant and the Christian tradition.
Finally, these notions of freedom and responsibility are applied, rather briefly, to an account of morality and the relations of morality and art. In Hampshire’s view, the central notion of morality is not, for instance, that of obligation or duty, but that of a good man. He shares with Aristotle the idea that to say of a man that he is good is to say that he is perfect, fully-developed, as a man; almost, that he is an excellent specimen of the type “man.” Every morality, accordingly, must contain as its central notion an idea of what a man should be, some doctrine of what is essentially human excellence. Such a notion Hampshire himself seeks to develop in outline from what he has said about the nature of man; in particular, the perfect man must be one who is to the fullest extent free, whose projects are based on a rational understanding of his own dispositions and capabilities, and which accordingly are not destroyed or frustrated by features of himself for which he has not allowed.
Merely from this summary (and I have left a lot out) it will be seen that the book contains a multitude of ideas variously and suggestively connected together. There is a good deal in the book that will certainly provoke doubt and disagreement. In particular, it is unclear that Hampshire has made his case about pointing as the natural foundation of linguistic reference; it may well be that pointing itself, in the sense that is required, is something that presupposes a linguistic context. On the relation between different sorts of intention, again, Hampshire’s thesis is obscure, both in respect of the “non-propositional” sort of knowledge of my intentions, and in the relations between the doctrine that to act intentionally involves having a certain sort of knowledge of what I am doing, and the assertion, which Hampshire thinks appropriate to neurotic behaviour, that a man may act in ignorance of his real intentions. The account of morality, further, is markedly schematic and incomplete, and some well-known difficulties in the Aristotelian notion that to be a good man is, roughly, to be good at being a man, are not really answered. More general criticism of the chapter on morality will also occur to the reader; whether, for instance, the rough picture of the good life (remarkably like Spinoza’s in its tone of anti-romantic heroism) could serve for other than a rather special sort of life attainable only in favourable circumstances, and whether allowance has been made for the somewhat unsympathetic consequences of this; and whether Hampshire has not incorporated into the notion of morality itself considerations that unduly narrow the concept, so that certain sorts of morality—religious morality, for instance—become on his view well-nigh incomprehensible.
It will be a long, and fruitful, task for anyone interested in human thought and morality to discuss the difficulties of Hampshire’s book. I should like to end by raising just one, more general, sort of criticism. It is my impression that Hampshire’s account pays insufficient attention to the applications of natural science to human behaviour, and that some of his distinctions and conclusions may well be called in question when one considers the possible advances in these sciences or even, in some cases, their present state. Now Hampshire certainly denies this, and part of his purpose, like that of Spinoza, is indeed to give an account of human action and freedom compatible with scientific enquiry into the mind. His success in this purpose, however, seems much less striking when the scientific advances for which his position is prepared turn out to be those of psycho-analysis—“the new positive science of human conduct”, as he optimistically terms it. To say that a view of human freedom is compatible with scientific advance because it is compatible with developments in psycho-analysis is much like saying that a material is uninflammable because it doesn’t burst into flames when one shines an electric torch light on it. This is all the more so in Hampshire’s case because he takes a markedly non-deterministic interpretation of psycho-analysis, considering it in effect as a theory of freedom. This is certainly a possible interpretation of psycho-analysis, and it may well be the most illuminating. However, it is only dubiously compatible with a good deal of what Freud, at least, says, and perhaps makes it even less clear than before, if this is possible, in what sense psycho-analysis is a positive science at all.
The really effective enemy against which theories of freedom should be prepared is not psycho-analysis but the neuro-physiology of the brain, and of this Hampshire has nothing to say. It may well be that a good number of his reflections on freedom would withstand any advance in this science as well; I think it is so. But the real enemy should be faced. It may be that Hampshire in fact thinks that neuro-physiology could not possibly advance to the point where it could yield substantial predictions of human behaviour. If so, arguments should be produced—it is a risky sort of claim.
There is another branch of natural science, too, to which Hampshire might have given more consideration. This is zoology; here the point is not that he should have made room for advances in science, but that consideration of its findings might well have modified the rigidity of some of his distinctions. For Hampshire, human action seems to be radically distinct from any other animal behaviour. Now this is in a sense true, in so far as the human possession of language and self-consciousness (which Hampshire rightly connects together) constitutes an enormous conceptual difference in our views of human and of other animal behaviour. But it does not follow from this that the behaviour of other animals is really mechanical, while ours is not; nor that the interpretation of animal behaviour as purposive consists only in reading into a stimulus-response system a pattern merely analogous to a pattern familiar in human action.
It is unclear how far Hampshire accepts this kind of conclusion, but he seems to me tempted to it. Thus, while admitting that animal behaviour is purposive in some sense or other, he certainly denies that we can attribute intentions to animals. Here I suspect Hampshire goes wrong in his concept of intention. It is true that we cannot ascribe sensibly to an animal an intention to do something in the future, which it has not yet embarked on. This is because it makes no sense to think of an animal using temporal ideas, save perhaps in the most rudimentary behavioural contexts. It does not follow from this, however, as Hampshire’s concept of intention leads him to infer, that it makes no sense to apply to an animal the concept of its intention in doing what it is doing. We can distinguish in the case of an animal, as we can with human beings, between what it is really doing, in the sense of what it is primarily up to, and the things that are merely concomitants of what it is doing. Thus what the dog may be really doing is digging for a bone, or digging a hole: not, in the same primary sense, turning over so many stones or making a scratching noise, though it is also doing these things. Of course the evidences for this will be different from those available in a comparable case of a human being, whom we can ask what he is doing. But to say that therefore the concept of intention in doing such-and-such therefore does not apply to animals suggests to me an excessively anthropocentric concept of intention; we can and must in the case of complex animal behaviour draw the distinction between what is really being done and what is concomitant, and this seems to me one firm ground of the concept of intention.
This is a highly complex question, and no simple view can be had on it. Yet I feel that as a matter of attitude, to put it no stronger, that had Hampshire had more vividly in mind the astonishing complexities of animal behaviour, and the marked continuities, not only of reaction, but of patterns of purposive action between the other animals and man, he would have allowed concepts of action and intention not so totally restricted to human activities.
Descartes, it will be remembered, thought that animals were machines; perhaps Hampshire’s view of animal behaviour constitutes the last Cartesian element in this profound and original anti-Cartesian book.
Notes
1. Thought and Action, by Stuart Hampshire (Chatto & Windus, 1959).
2. Cf. “Ludwig Wittgenstein,” by Eric Heller, Encounter, Sept. 1959.
3. Spinoza, by Stuart Hampshire (Penguin, 1951).
The Theological Appearance of the Church of England: An External View
My disqualifications for writing about this subject are many; I must start by declaring some. I am not a member of the Church of England, and thus may be suspected of being biassed against it, or at least lacking in sympathy with it. The fact that I am not a member of any other church, either, may do something to alleviate the first suspicion, but may, on the other hand, only tend to aggravate the second, since it may be thought that only Christians are likely to show much understanding in questions of Christian theology. To a certain extent, this must of course be admitted: a theology is not something that can just be “got up”, or completely understood from the outside. Nevertheless, it surely cannot be that unbelief is a complete bar to discussion, if the Church is to speak, not only with itself, but with those outside—which is surely what the Church must hope to do. So I hope that some unpolemical remarks from someone outside will not necessarily and completely lack point.
Since I belong to no church, it will be seen that my reasons for unbelief do not consist merely of objections to Anglicanism, but are more general than that. It is not my aim here, however, to raise these general difficulties. I shall merely try to discuss some features of the Anglican position today, as I understand it. Here I shall make the last of my introductory apologies: that I have no doubt that I understand it very imperfectly. Perhaps some of the things I say will be merely misunderstandings. I do hope, though, that if they are misunderstandings, they are not merely personal misunderstandings, but misunderstandings shared with others outside the Church who take an interest in it. If so—and discussions I have had with others suggest that it is so—perhaps I can hope that even my mistakes will have some symptomatic kind of interest.
I have spoken of “the Anglican position”. But one immediate and notorious difficulty is that of identifying an Anglican position at all. Quot Anglicani, tot sententiae would be an unfair exaggeration, but the despairing enquirer has been known to think it. The variation of Anglican opinion is a familiar, but not a trivial, difficulty. There are those who do not find it a difficulty, but rather a recommendation, indicative of a wide freedom of conscience. It seems to me, however, that it undoubtedly is a difficulty, even if not an insuperable one; because the Anglican Church does offer itself to those outside as a church, and it is as a church that they are invited to join it. It would not be a church if it were only a kind of federation of beliefs, a label that could be worn without bad conscience by anyone from a Roman Catholic minus Papal infallibility to a Methodist plus bishops. The Anglican Church is not, of course, merely this, but it sometimes seems so; and its seeming so is the reason why its great variation of belief is indeed a difficulty.
It is a platitude to contrast the Church of England in this respect with the Church of Rome. It is important, however, what the point of this contrast is. It is not that the Church of Rome presents in all places uniformly the same appearance; it obviously does not. The point is that with the Church of Rome there is in the end a more or less determinate procedure for discovering what are the central and essential beliefs, and what are local variations, and with the Anglican Church there is not—or, at least, there does not seem to be. It may be objected that Rome earns these advantages by the devices of dogmatic pronouncement and excommunication, repugnant to the Anglican position. This may well be true, but it misses the present point. For it is not being suggested that the Church of England should have the same body of essential belief as Rome, or any as elaborate; but only that there should be some central body of beliefs common to all. If it is now suggested that devices of excommunication, etc., are necessary to preserve even that minimum uniformity in the Anglican Church, the questioner will surely be justified in thinking that the raison d’être of the Anglican Church as a distinct entity is hard to find.
It will be said that such a minimum uniformity of belief indeed exists. But it is not always easy to believe this; for while the same words can be heard more or less from all, the sense that is attached to these words is certainly various. This is a point I shall come back to. Even if there is a central core, however, it should still be made clearer what is the central core, and what the individual variations. When I say that this should be made clearer, I mean among other things that one should be able to discover this by asking those in orders. Here one touches on another notorious contrast with the Church of Rome, that, very broadly speaking, the average Roman Catholic priest seems to be more thoroughly theologically educated (if I may use the expression) than the average clergyman. This is a very well-known point, which raises questions of the training for the priesthood beyond my scope; I only want to make the point, if it needs making, that this difference undoubtedly affects the status of the Anglican Church in the eyes of the intelligent enquirer.
The point needs making, I think, if only because there seem to be many Anglicans, and some in orders, who find an emphasis on theology irrelevant. These will tend, if questioned about the Church, to point primarily to its social work and moral influence. Now there is no doubt that the Church must show itself socially, and in the broader sense politically, concerned; because—to put the point only in crudely tactical terms—it still undeniably has an unfortunate “class image” to live down. It is no accident that both Roman Catholicism and Nonconformism have such powerful roots among working people. But, obviously, there is no point in this social work without a Christian significance, and there will be no Christian significance without a theology. It is only if behind social and moral action there is a belief, and a belief which to some extent can be explained, that the unbeliever will not be justified in merely replying that he prefers his social work without fancy dress.
This may seem quite platitudinous. I hope it is; I would be more convinced that it was if one did not quite often encounter Anglicans—again, unhappily, some in orders—whose views on the relation between their belief and their social or personal morality were quite inadequate. There are those whose religion turns out just to be their morality, whose religious outlook really can be described as “morality tinged with emotion”. Others go beyond this, only to introduce God as the crudest kind of sanction for morality. I have myself been addressed by a R.A.F. chaplain who told us that, after all, one wouldn’t steal if somebody were watching, and the thing about God is that he is watching one all the time … It was unclear whether this curious consideration was supposed to mean that because God exists, one shouldn’t steal, or that because one knows that one shouldn’t steal, one can see that God exists. I got the impression that the chaplain didn’t mind which he meant.
One would have to be very uncharitable to hold such individual idiocies against the Church as a whole. But they do not help it, and steps should be taken to see that no clergyman goes out to represent the Church without a deeper and sounder moral theology. This merely reverts to the training question. There are at least two points, however, on which I have the impression that the Church as a whole needs deeper thought about its moral theology. One concerns the relation between such things in this life as the improvement of living conditions, and the hope of eternal salvation which is said to be the end of the Christian life. It seems possible that these two should conflict: so far as those whose lot is to be bettered are concerned, it is certainly not self-evident that material betterment will improve their chances of living the kind of life which, we are told, is likely to lead to salvation. Some of the darker reactionaries in such places as the Spanish Roman Church notoriously see this point, and holding that their task is to lead souls to salvation and that this life is only a drop in eternity, oppose a good deal of social reform. Some Christians dismiss this view too lightly—it has a kind of savage consistency. If they are to reject this view, as all Anglicans presumably will, they must put something in its place. One simple way is to say that it is a known Christian duty to aid others less fortunate than oneself, and in performing this duty, one pursues one’s own way to salvation. But put just like that, this sounds too self-regarding, as though one were making others the instruments of one’s own salvation. If it is replied that this is a superficial objection, because the duty in question is precisely not to be self-regarding, but to love others as oneself, a difficulty still remains: for the duty is presumably not to love them and aid them merely as temporal human beings with material wants, but as children of God destined, in his Grace, to salvation. The question then remains, whether the right way of expressing love to men in this character is in all cases to work for their social betterment. Nor will it resolve the difficulty to warn the doubter against the presumption of considering the salvation of others, and to urge him to leave that to them and God, and concern himself with his own; for the doubt will remain, whether pursuing these policies of social betterment is the way for him to concern himself with his own salvation.
This is a practical problem, and a deep problem of the relations, for a Christian, of time and eternity. Many Anglicans seem not to have given enough thought to it.
The second point about moral theology is a yet more general one. Unbelievers often say in a truculent tone that the lives of Christians don’t seem all that different from the lives of others. This may just be the relatively superficial point that they don’t seem to be much better men; about this the Christian has things, sufficiently familiar, to say. But when those things have been said, a deeper point remains. For even if one granted what the Christian has to say of original sin and the ways in which things become harder if one is a Christian rather than easier, there remains the feeling that there should be a distinctively Christian way of thinking about moral problems, what might be called, for want of a better phrase, a Christian style of moral thought. Now there is such a thing; or, rather, there is more than one. There is, on the one side, what has come to be called “the Nonconformist conscience”. Admirable though its possessors often are, the doubter in the modern world, corrupted, perhaps, by complexity, knows that he cannot commit himself whole to its simplifications. On the other hand, there is a highly complex style of Roman Catholic moral thought. The heart of this style is casuistry—not in the pejorative sense, but in the strict sense of a method of moral argument that seeks to bring every action and character that is to be decided or judged under certain fixed categories of virtue or good deed, vice or sin. Here again the doubter must hesitate: surely he knows that things cannot be so fixed, that the categories must be open to revision, criticism, extension?
Between is the Church of England. But where? Here, it seems to me, it has both a lack and an opportunity. A lack, because as things are, it scarcely seems to have an individual style of moral thought. Exhortations to the imitatio Christi are not, by themselves, enough; up to a point, even the unbeliever can agree to do likewise, and beyond that point, there is need of precisely the kind of moral thinking in essentially Christian terms that is lacking. It has, however, also an opportunity, to find a style of thought more apposite to our complexities than the rigidities, respectively simple and complex, of its neighbours.
Moral theology is, of course, not self-sufficient. Behind it there must be a Christology; and this raises, in the first place, the questions of historicity. Christianity is said by all to be an historical religion, based not only on the facts of Christ’s life and crucifixion but on the Resurrection. It is also, I suppose, an historical religion in a rather different sense: it is a religion concerned, like its relatives Judaism and Islam, with its own history, and in particular concerned with the continuity of belief from its beginnings. Now the intelligent unbeliever knows this as well as the Christian does, and will not be impressed by attempts to duck the consequences of it. In particular, he probably recalls that S. Paul said, “If Christ be not risen, then is our faith vain”, and will tend very firmly to think that the moment Christians start shuffling on the historical claims for the Resurrection, they might as well shut up shop.
I should not have thought it necessary to say anything so obvious, had I not heard a very distinguished Anglican theologian being questioned closely for about twenty minutes on his belief in the Resurrection, at the end of which it was still not clear whether he thought that as a matter of historical fact Christ rose from the grave or not. There was a good deal of talk about “analogical sense”, “surviving spirit”; a theologian might have found in this a sad confusion between the events of Easter Sunday and those of Pentecost, but in brusquer terms, it was just a piece of unconscionable double-talk.
This raises again the question mentioned before, of the unity of belief. This theologian was quite prepared to say that Christ rose—the difficulties came when he was asked to say what he meant by it. This is a particularly striking case, of course, because in the case of the Resurrection there is no doubt at all about what the words, in their natural interpretation, do mean. It is not so with many theological doctrines. There are two quite different ways in which theological assertions may cause difficulty to the enquirer: they may be incredible, or they may be incomprehensible. The doctrine of the Resurrection, if it presents a difficulty, does so only by being incredible: it is perfectly clear what one is required to believe, only it is not easy to believe it. With such doctrines, if they are certainly part of the faith, it is no part of the theologian’s task to try to find a new meaning for the terms that express them. If he does so, he is certainly abandoning the religion. With doctrines such as the Incarnation and the Trinity, the situation is different, for the difficulty of these is their incomprehensibility: it is hard, not so much to believe them, as to take the preliminary step of recognising what has to be believed in order to believe them. It is of course essential that anything that is to be called Christianity contains these doctrines, and contains them moreover in a transcendental form, that is, in such a form that what is being asserted by them is not merely something, however “spiritual”, about the temporal life and personality of Christ. I have occasionally seen Anglican clergymen slipping nervously in what looked suspiciously like that direction, though it might be unfair to suppose that there was any such dilutionary tendency in Anglican thought as a whole.
Last one comes to the question of God’s existence, and of the arguments that can be given for it. It seems to me essential that there should be some arguments, and it has certainly been the tradition of the Church of England to give some. It is essential that there should be such arguments, not so much to persuade unbelievers—not many can have been converted by purely theological considerations—but in order to give some basis to what otherwise might be an utterly subjective feeling, and also to give content to the belief itself: the nature of the arguments itself gives clues to the nature of the God, the existence of whom they purport to prove. Thus the argument from the first cause illustrates God’s nature as Creator, the argument from moral experience his goodness and concern with mankind, etc.
In the matter of such arguments, the Church of England is in a peculiarly difficult historical position. It has been its traditional role, and one of its most English features, to rely on those arguments for God’s existence that have most empirical content, which appeal most to the observed nature of the world. Chief among these was the so-called Argument from Design, the argument from the evident purposiveness and fitness of natural things, to the existence of the Great Artificer. Such arguments (as Kant observed) are more satisfying, seem to have more real content, than the more abstract proofs from contingency, the nature of being, and so on, on which the Church of Rome has characteristically most relied. This is true, but there is a corresponding disadvantage. Empirical content is like income: the larger it is, the nicer, but also the more tax it attracts, the tax in the case of arguments being the likelihood of empirical refutation.
The tax-collector arrived in the form of the theory of evolution by natural selection; and it was because the Church of England was so attached to the Argument from Design that it experienced a convulsion over Darwinism of a sort that Rome (whose own crisis had come over Galileo) largely managed to avoid. Paley’s Watch had been the Church’s timepiece, and suddenly it stopped.
It is important to see what the difficulty is. It is not that Darwinism disproves the existence of God. The truth of Darwinism is not incompatible with the existence of God, even if it makes his choice of means seem even more mysterious than before. The difficulty for the Church was not that Darwin disproved their conclusion, but that he removed what was apparently the strongest argument they had for it. That argument depended essentially on pointing to something in the world which, it was alleged, could not be explained except on theological principles; Darwin did explain it on non-theological principles (or, to be fairer, his successors are progressively doing so); and this certainly removes the force from the Argument from Design.
The question “is science incompatible with religion?” is now generally seen to be too vague to admit of an answer. What is true is that there are certain arguments for religion, depending essentially on an appeal to the inexplicable, which do collapse under the advance of scientific explanation; and the Church of England seems to show an eery compulsion to embrace just such arguments. This compulsion still continues. Some Anglicans appeal to the emergence of life from the non-living, and so give hostages to bio-chemistry. Others appeal to the start of the universe, and give hostages to cosmology, which may show that there is no necessity to postulate any start to the universe at all. Others—and it is essentially the same sort of argument—appeal to the existence of religious experience, and so put themselves in the hands of psychological advance; for here again, while it would be quite possible to reconcile any psychological explanation of such experience with the existence of God, if we knew on other grounds that God existed, there is a very poor prognosis for a belief in God which is itself mainly based on the psychological inexplicability of those experiences.
Granted all this, there is of course always one question left, which one knows a priori could not be answered by any scientific advance: the question, sufficiently broadly taken, of why the universe exists at all. Since all scientific explanation depends essentially on explaining one part of the universe by reference to another, it cannot in principle explain the existence of the universe as a whole. The trouble is that when the question is taken as broadly as that, its meaning and compulsiveness may seem depressingly to evaporate. We have certainly moved a long way from the impressive workings, to be seen on every side, of Archbishop Paley’s Watch.
Here, clearly, the unbeliever can have nothing to say. Since he believes there to be no arguments which will prove this conclusion, he could not, if he dared, suggest where to look for them. But perhaps he may suggest that the Church of England make a more violent effort to detach itself from the damnosa hereditas of its addiction to the scientifically refutable, and find something else which will be more solid and enduring, and yet in keeping with its tradition of eschewing the more abstract and rarefied forms of argument in favour of the more familiar and compelling. If it can.
The Four Loves, by C. S. Lewis
The Four Loves are Affection, Friendship, Eros and Charity. In this brief book Professor Lewis discusses each; its difficulties, dangers and rewards.1 He starts off with an introductory chapter in which he principally distinguishes between what he calls Gift-loves and Need-loves—a distinction of some importance to his later thoughts, although he rightly admits its limitations, since there are many whose need it is to make a gift of their love. He also has a chapter on, as he puts it, our ‘liking and loves for the sub-human,’ and there speaks of such things as patriotism and the love for animals. On his title-page are the words of Donne: ‘that our affections kill us not, nor dye’; his aim is to show us a life full of, but not torn apart by, love, something only possible in his view if the love that crowns it is the love of God.
Perhaps we should not say that the author of this book is Professor Lewis. This is a work of the C. S. Lewis who wrote The Screwtape Letters, and it is appropriate (even if only a publisher’s convention) that the list of the author’s works on the fly-leaf does not include the history of sixteenth-century English literature, nor The Allegory of Love. It is not just that in books like this Lewis writes without professorial solemnity—that, indeed, is true of his critical works as well. It is rather that in approaching his present subject he jettisons that state of mind in which alone one could hope to learn from the literature of love, a state of mind that involves the suspension of assertion and a readiness for any degree of complexity. He starts afresh, with lots of good sense and a genuine humility, to put together some thoughts about his own and the general experience. This gives his work a first-handness not to be despised: it is not derivative or ‘literary’ in the bad sense.
Yet the price is high. By banishing from his mind that less general experience, those warnings of complexity, that the literature of love offers he hands himself over to his own particular demon—a kind of clubman’s crassness which can be heard over and over again in these pages striking a false note. Sometimes he merely expresses himself in a way that makes it hard to believe he can enjoy good writing: ‘If we were short of matter on this theme we could turn on the tap by opening the works of the Stoics and it would run till we had a bathful.’ Sometimes, particularly in religious matters, he uses some jarringly hearty analogy. Sometimes he throws up the discussion of a serious question with what seems almost a willed superficiality. Having raised the question of the connections, if any, between male friendship and what he calls ‘abnormal Eros,’ he ends a brief and combative discussion: ‘… and all those hairy old toughs of centurions in Tacitus, clinging to one another and begging for last kisses when the legion was broken up—all pansies? If you can believe that you can believe anything.’
These outbreaks of padre talk make for painful reading. The odd thing about the book, however, is that this is obviously not a padre talking. Now and again, a deeper insight and a freer sensibility are allowed to emerge. There are one or two memorable images: ‘… we picture lovers face to face but Friends side by side; their eyes look ahead.’ In this book Lewis is rather like a porpoise; we see its jolly sportings on the surface, and when it goes deeper it disappears from view, but we know that it does have a submarine life.
What is obscure is why Lewis behaves like a porpoise. Partly, perhaps, from a fear of what he sees as spiritual or emotional pretentiousness; partly, I think, with the aim of popularisation. Wishing to put before a wide public his own way to God, he seizes on the robustly commonplace as that in which most may share. Because he is free of contempt for the robustly commonplace, this is in no way dishonest or condescending; but because there is something in him that sees below it, it is quite often uncomfortable. This uncomfortableness, moreover, must tend to defeat his purpose, since on love, of all subjects, writing can carry conviction only if it is born of everything that a man has in him to say about it.2
Notes
1. The Four Loves, by C. S. Lewis (Bles, 1960).
2. This review originally appeared as “ ‘That Our Affections Kill Us Not,’ ” Spectator, April 1, 1960.
Discourse on Method, by René Descartes
The fame of Descartes has at least three separate and very firm foundations. In philosophy, it was he who made into the starting point of the philosopher’s inquiry the question, ‘Of what can I be certain,’ and by so doing turned Western philosophy on to a path which in good part it has followed ever since. By asking this question, and by finding as the first and basic answer to it the famous cogito ergo sum—‘I am thinking, therefore I exist’—he did something virtually unthinkable to his predecessors: he made the first certainties of philosophy the immediate data of the individual consciousness, and the main problem of philosophy the sceptical difficulty of how I can ever know that anything except these immediate data exists. Earlier philosophers had taken as the first certainties God, or the world, or some other realm of being outside the individual, and asked how the individual was related to them; Descartes took first the experiences of the individual, and asked how he could go beyond them to knowledge of anything ‘outside.’
The consequences of this revolution have involved, perhaps, as much darkness as light, and many have now come to doubt whether Descartes did ask the right question after all. Nevertheless, it was a step that thought had to take, and a great depth of insight has been gained from seeing where it leads. One extraordinary feature of Descartes’ revolution is that it does seem to have been essentially an individual achievement. Although many elements of his thought are of course less original than he supposed, its central idea seems to have been his alone. Many have supposed themselves to be changing, unaided, the face of philosophy: Descartes really did it.
Second, in mathematics, Descartes has his fame as the founder of analytical geometry. Here his achievement is less startlingly individual. The groundwork was being pursued by his immediate predecessors, and the subject in its present form is said to owe more to the researches, unpublished for many years, of his great contemporary, Fermat. Nevertheless it was he who first clearly brought together algebra and geometry, in a form to produce results of the greatest significance and power.
His third claim to fame is less fundamental but of large historical importance. When in 1637, at the age of forty-one, he produced his first published work, the Discourse on Method, he wrote it in French, in order to reach over the heads of the scholarly readers who expected their philosophy in Latin, and to reach a wider public of men of good sense who, he hoped, would be more open to the voice of pure reason than were the fusty pedants of the Schools. He wrote it in a French which, in the elegance and simplicity it gives to abstract thought, is a wonderful literary achievement. By so doing, he made himself the model for an enduring tradition devoted to the values of a rigorous yet unpedantic clarity. This tradition often collapses into a mythology, and Descartes would no doubt pale at the rationalistic idiocies often praised as examples of l’esprit cartésien; yet the tradition has great achievements to its credit, and not solely in France.
Thus Descartes, literary as well as philosophical and mathematical innovator, has every right to a proud place in any series of Classics. The present selection gives us, besides the Discourse on Method, the Meditations of 1641 and one further text.1 It is a pity, perhaps, that the selection is not rather larger; some extracts from the psychological writings, for instance, would have given a wider view of Descartes’ system. A greater pity, however, is what has happened in this version to Descartes’ style. Descartes should carry one along; here one stumbles over an uneven terrain, tripping over obscurities, omissions, and occasional downright mistranslations. Enough remains for this to be a passable introduction to Descartes’ thought: enough has gone to make at least his third claim to fame, as a philosophical stylist of genius, look rather puzzling.2
Notes
1. Discourse on Method, by René Descartes, translated by Arthur Wollaston (Penguin Classics, 1960).
2. This review originally appeared as “Certainties,” Spectator, August 26, 1960.
The Individual Reason: L’esprit laïc
No era in the history of scientific ideas is more celebrated than the seventeenth century, the century that contains the work of Kepler, of Galileo, of Descartes, and culminates in the publication, in 1687, of Newton’s Principia. The celebration of this great century is just, from more than one point of view. The mere intellectual achievements, individual and cumulative, are gigantic. More than that, the century saw a decisive shift in men’s general outlook, and the firm establishment of what is, to all intents and purposes, the modern attitude towards the physical universe. Besides this, again, the history of these developments, particularly in the first half of the century, is of the greatest dramatic and personal interest, and it is not surprising that the outstanding example of this element, the life of Galileo, should be a recurrent theme of drama and literature, as well as of the history of ideas.
A Conflict over Freedom of Thought?
If we ask what it is about these events that makes them dramatic, we should naturally say that it was a conflict—a conflict between the new science and traditional authority. This conflict tends to present itself as a straightforward conflict over freedom of thought—a fight between those who claimed the right to discover and publish new truths, and those who claimed the right to suppress and silence them. This simple and recognizable picture of the situation we owe, in good part, to the propagandists of the Enlightenment; those who, a century later and in pursuit of definite political and ideological ends, presented the history of these years, as indeed they saw it, in the light of truth versus obscurantism, freedom against power.
There is some truth in this picture. But it is, of course, grossly over-simplified, and its over-simplifications tend to diminish rather than to enhance the dramatic and historical interest of the conflicts of ideas in the seventeenth century. It is only when one looks rather more closely at the kinds of authority that were being rejected, and the kinds of truth, or of ways of truth, that seventeenth-century thinkers sought to put in their place, that one can see the real importance of the century for the history of ideas. The celebrated conflicts were more than a campaign in the struggle for freedom of thought; they concerned the nature of scientific inquiry itself. They raised, in particular, two vital issues. First, what is the relation of scientific inquiry to traditional authority? To this question the century returned a fairly unambiguous answer. Second, what is the relation of scientific inquiry to the common understanding, to the methods of thought of the ordinary inexpert man? To this question it returned a variety of answers, mostly ambiguous and none entirely satisfactory. This latter problem is still essentially with us. It is these two questions—and they are not unrelated to each other—that I should like to pick out from the seventeenth-century picture. In doing this, I shall concentrate mostly on two thinkers, very different in temperament, both from the first half of the century: Galileo and Descartes.
New Approach to the Idea of Authority
First, what about authority? Here we naturally and immediately think of the authority of the Church, both in the sense of power of the Church, its Inquisition and its censorship, and in the sense of theological authority—the claim of the Church, or of certain of its dignitaries, to lay down on supposedly theological grounds what might and might not be believed in natural science. The conflict of the new ideas with this sort of authority is placed firmly in the centre of the historical scene by the case of Galileo. Yet we must not be misled by this case into thinking that the rejection of authority that went with the new ideas was a rejection peculiarly of ecclesiastical authority—this was only one instance of something more general and, from the point of view of the ideas themselves, more important: a new approach to the whole idea of authority in scientific matters. Nor must we suppose that the authority of the Church in general was being called in question: the most that came into question, in relation to scientific ideas, was the use of theological authority to buttress particular cosmological and mechanical theories. Indeed, the general line of the scientists was to say that there was, strictly speaking, no conflict between any of the new scientific ideas and the doctrines of the Church; what was happening was that certain officers of the Church, through malice or confusion, were involving the Church in matters on which it was not theologically required to pronounce.
This line was in some part dictated by prudence; yet it is interesting that Galileo, radical and even provocative though he is in many respects, seems to stick to it. His attitude is well brought out by a note added in his copy of his Dialogues Concerning the Two Chief World Systems, the marvellous book that precipitated his condemnation: ‘Take note, theologians, that in your drive to make matters of faith out of propositions relating to the fixity of sun and earth you run the risk of eventually having to condemn as heretics those who would declare the earth to stand still and the sun to move—at such a time as it might be physically or logically proved that the earth moves and the sun stands still’. In such passages, Galileo’s thought seems to be that when you see that the authority of religion is merely irrelevant to the demonstration of scientific views, you will have the true measure of both religion and science.
Vast Untidy Cocoon
With Descartes, the situation is more complex. Far more cautious than Galileo—‘it is not my temperament’, he once said, ‘to set sail against the wind’—he wraps his true thoughts about the Church in a vast untidy cocoon of concession, deference, and theological argument. Yet it is certain that his Catholic belief was itself genuine, and further, that he did not think, as Galileo seems to have thought, that theology was actually irrelevant to science. On the contrary, in his Principles of Philosophy he himself seeks to derive the basic laws of motion from the properties of God. The derivation is extremely feeble, and the laws in good part mistaken: yet there it is, and something he thought worth doing. But behind this peculiar metaphysical enterprise, so alien to the naturalistic style of Galileo’s argument, there is a deeper similarity between the two. For Descartes’ supposed derivation is a derivation from first principles, from properties of God supposedly self-evident to the reflective mind: it is not a derivation resting on texts, received authorities, or the accumulated interpretations of the ages. This is their great similarity, and the guiding thread through the conflicts with authority: for neither of these two, nor for the other seventeenth-century makers of the new science, was it relevant to a scientific argument to cite or rely on the inherited authority of texts, or the views of distinguished and admired thinkers of the past: you had to look, and think, for yourself. The fact that those who deployed the received texts and appealed to authority were doing so for the most part in an ecclesiastical interest is largely beside the point; the important thing is that it was the method that was wrong, in whatever interest it was being used.
The point is made over and over again, in different connexions: the point that what was said in the past is relevant to scientific inquiry only if it can stand the tests of rigorous inquiry in the present. Thus Descartes in the earliest of his philosophical works, the Rules for the Direction of Understanding, advocates a method for discovering the truth, and characteristically remarks by the way: ‘Neither, though we have mastered all the arguments of Plato and Aristotle, if yet we have not the capacity for passing a solid judgment on these matters, shall we become philosophers; we should have acquired the knowledge, not of a science, but of history’. And in Galileo’s Dialogues, when the scholastic anti-Galilean speaker—characteristically christened by him ‘Simplicio’—cites the authority of Aristotle for some supposed scientific law or experimental result, he is always brought up with the same objection: the authority of Aristotle is only that of any other brilliant and observant man, and the question is, ‘is the law in fact true?’; ‘can the experiments be repeated?’
If, then, a scientific inquiry did not rely, as an historical inquiry must, on the authority of texts; and if the powers of the mind involved in scientific inquiry were not directly those involved in the exegesis of texts, the weighing of authorities, and so on, what were the powers of the mind involved? And who possessed them? What was the seventeenth-century scientists’ picture of the scientist himself?
To these questions there is no simple answer. But one recurrent strain that can be found is the tendency of these thinkers, confronted with prejudice and non-comprehension on the part of the academic vested interests, to turn to ordinary educated men of good sense for an audience and a following. In this respect Galileo and Descartes are alike. Both wrote important works in their native language, instead of the Latin that was still the vehicle of learned communication; both seeking by this to go over the heads of monks and professors to men of good sense in the world of non-academic pursuits. Both of them despised the academic hierarchies, and preferred, on the whole, the company of practical men of affairs, who knew what they were talking about in their own fields. Descartes explains, in the Discourse on Method, how in his youth he took up travelling and moved in the world of courts and armies: ‘It seemed to me that I might meet with much more truth in the reasonings that each man makes on the matters that specially concern him, and the issue of which might very soon punish him if he made a wrong judgment, than in the case of those made by a man of letters in his study touching speculations which lead to no result’. It is notable how many of Descartes’ friends were ambassadors or other men of affairs; indeed it was such men who intervened to help him when he was involved in a protracted and unpleasant dispute with university pedants in Holland.
The Appeal to Good Sense
Certainly Descartes and Galileo seemed to have thought that it was the sort of good sense that was possessed by intelligent men of affairs to which they could appeal with the new scientific reasonings, from which they could hope for understanding. However, were such abilities sufficient to produce scientific reasonings; was the scientist just the man of everyday good sense who applied it in the right way to science? Sometimes Descartes, at least, writes as though it were so; indeed, he goes further. The Discourse on Method famously begins:
Good sense is of all things in the world the most equally distributed, for everybody thinks himself so abundantly provided with it, that even those most difficult to please in all other matters do not commonly desire more of it than they already possess. It is unlikely that this is an error on their part; it seems rather to support the view that the power of distinguishing the true from the false, which is properly speaking what is called Good Sense or Reason, is by nature equal in all men.
He then goes on to say that this being so the reason why some men understand and learn more things than others is that the others do not properly use their natural gifts, but if they are given a method for using these gifts, they may each be as good judges of the truth as others. Such a method, of course, he will propound. This, at any rate, is Descartes’ professed view: the mark of science is the method: this method can be learnt and employed by any man, in the light of the natural reason which all men possess.
It is not clear, however, how far Descartes really believed this. The dry joke about everyone’s satisfaction with his good sense—a well-known saying, incidentally, to be found already in Montaigne—immediately suggests irony; and certainly there is little to be found in Descartes’ own attitude to other researchers which suggests that he thought them of equal ability to himself, only needing acquaintance with the method to set them on the path. Nor, if he did think so, did he exactly go out of his way to help them on to the path; thus he deliberately wrote his Geometry in an obscure style for fear that its originality would not be recognized if he made it too easy, and it gave him special pleasure to think of the difficulty it would give to distinguished French geometers. It is not unfair to say that Descartes’ general attitude to science was that it was a business for geniuses, and that there were, at least, very few of them besides himself.
No Feeling of Scientific Community
The self-absorption which is very noticeable in Descartes, the lack of interest in the scientific efforts of others, is not peculiar to him; on the contrary, the absence of a sense of a scientific community is characteristic of the earlier seventeenth century. In part, it was due to lack of communications: the institutions designed to further communication, such as the Royal Society in this country, are the product of the sixteen-sixties and later. But this is not the only reason; even when the channels existed, the messages were often ignored. Thus Galileo, having been sent Kepler’s book, left it unread—disastrously, if not (in this case) altogether surprisingly. Descartes, again, was sent some important work of Galileo by the Abbé Mersenne, whose indefatigable scientific correspondence made him almost a single-handed Royal Society; ‘I have no time to read Galileo’, Descartes loftily replied. There is a deeper reason than lack of communications here. It is that in the first part of the century the men in the front of the new advance tended fantastically to under-estimate the size of the scientific task before them, and were able to believe that in outline at least the shape of all scientific explanations might be discovered by one man of genius, or a few, in their own lifetimes. Granted this, it is not surprising that they should have not carried very far any belief which they had, that science was really only the methodical application of the good sense which was latent in the common understanding. Genius, or a genius, was enough.
Nevertheless, in their rejection of the academic professionals which I have already mentioned, there did arise the notion that it was some sort of unprofessional good sense or natural light of reason that, given the right method, could discover the truth. Nowhere do we find this element more pronounced than in the writings of Galileo’s English contemporary, Francis Bacon. He was much inferior in scientific and philosophical powers to Galileo and the other leaders of thought—‘he writes philosophy like a Lord Chancellor’, William Harvey tartly said of him; but he busied himself in projects for the spread and utilization of science, which, precisely perhaps because of his lack of scientific genius, bring the subject nearer to the worlds of politics, committees, and economic organization. Bacon did indeed believe that there was a scientific method which anyone of moderate good sense could employ; and though he, too, tended to share the illusion that the main scientific discoveries would be made very quickly, he did have a view of the scientific process which would allow of an indefinitely prolonged effort by the combined activities of sensible men who had been properly trained. His views have correspondingly had a wide appeal at different times to societies in which these qualities were at a premium; as the American scholar C. C. Gillispie has admirably put it in his recent book, The Edge of Objectivity:
Baconianism has always held a special appeal as the way of science in societies which develop a vocation for the betterment of man’s estate, and which confide not in aristocracies whether of birth or brains, but in a wisdom to be elicited from common pursuits—in seventeenth-century England, in eighteenth-century France, in nineteenth-century America, amongst Marxists of all countries.
Two Attitudes to the Scientist
Thus in the rise of modern scientific method at the beginning of the seventeenth century, and its displacement of appeals to authority in such matters, we find lurking two different attitudes to the scientist himself. On the one hand, there is the natural emphasis on the genius who invented the method, or at least applied it with conspicuous brilliance and success, and who may hope to apply it to all principal problems in his lifetime. On the other hand, there is the notion of a common understanding between men of good sense uncorrupted by traditional learning, to which the genius may appeal as an audience of his discoveries, and who may, once the method has been discovered, be able to apply it and carry on the business of scientific inquiry by a suitable division of labour. Neither of these attitudes contained the truth about science: it is not to the point here to examine the relations of the scientific genius to the vast body of scientists who are not geniuses; it is enough to say, contrary to both the Baconian and the genius-centred views, that both of these types are needed.
There is one feature of this situation, however, that demands a final word. In the adjustment over the last three centuries of what might be called the genius element and the journeyman element in the scientific process, one set of people who have tended to be excluded are those that are neither geniuses nor journeymen scientists: those non-scientific men of good sense, whom Galileo and Descartes had in mind, seem to have become scientists themselves, and have had their good sense suitably trained, or to remain non-scientific and find their good sense not adequate to understanding what is going on. The plain man seems once more, by a characteristic historical circle, to be set against authority, only this time the authority is that of the scientist: whether he is regarded as the genius whose processes of thought are beyond ordinary reach, or as the journeyman who, even if his talents are not much stronger than the plain man’s, has had a formal professional training in techniques of thought and inquiry which are incomprehensible to the untrained mind, however good its sense.
For a plain man who suffers from this well-known feeling of exclusion from the world of natural science, a look at the history of scientific ideas in the seventeenth century can be most rewarding. For one thing, it can actually remove some of the grounds of the feeling: to see men of genius painfully constructing ideas which are now commonplace, in order to solve problems which are now, thanks to their efforts, simple, is to learn in fact a good deal about the processes of scientific thought. But even if it did not cure his present sense of exclusion, a visit to those years would fortify, retrospectively, as it were, his plain man’s self-respect. For at some points in the seventeenth century, if he were lucky enough to be at the right place at the right time, he could for a short while see the world of scientific discovery clearly with his own eyes, under a brilliant sky in which the clouds of traditional authority had dispersed and the clouds of expert authority had not yet gathered.
What Is Existentialism?
It is not easy to explain Existentialism, for two reasons. First, it is by any standards an obscure philosophy, whose exponents tend to express themselves in a very dark style. Second, there is a great variety of thinkers who might be called in the broadest sense ‘existentialists’, but whose views are very different one from another—some are Marxists, some liberals; some are atheists, and others Christians. Not all of those often called ‘Existentialists’ will accept the title.
Nevertheless, some threads run through this range of thought. To pick up the threads, it is probably best to look at the historical influences that have produced Existentialism. Of these, the most important is perhaps the nineteenth-century Danish thinker, Søren Kierkegaard. Kierkegaard was a deeply religious man, dominated by the idea—an extreme Protestant idea—of man’s inadequacy in the face of God. In particular, he rejected with great vehemence and impressive intensity the philosophy then dominant in Europe, the philosophy of Hegel. Hegel’s system he regarded as abstract, intellectual, inhuman, and as offering false comforts: it tried to absorb man and his individual experience into a generalised picture of the world, and this concealed what Kierkegaard saw as a gulf between men and the world, and between men and God, which could only be bridged by an act of faith, a leap in the dark, which had to be taken in ‘fear and trembling’. To lose oneself in the generalised notions of an academic system like Hegel’s was to evade reality and responsibility.
This letter has been included as a reminder of the extraordinary work of the BBC World Service in more generous times.
A certain influence from Kierkegaard can be found in all existentialists, even those who, unlike him, are atheists. Among such existentialists, the best-known is the contemporary French philosopher, playwright, and novelist, Jean-Paul Sartre; his views are largely shared by his friend, the woman writer Simone de Beauvoir. Sartre’s central view is that ‘man has no essence’—that there is nothing that he has to be, no fixed pattern laid down for him to follow. The basic fact about man is just that he exists: hence the name ‘existentialist’. He exists, moreover, as a conscious being, someone who can be aware of what he is doing—aware, moreover, of this fact that there is no fixed pattern laid down for him, no values given to him from outside. This awareness gives man freedom to choose: and he has to choose, to commit himself, to certain values, and a certain way of life. This choice is, however, arbitrary: there is nothing to show a man how he must choose, but choose he must. Hence the despair or anxiety which writers like Sartre find at the bottom of things—it comes from the fact that man must choose, when his choice must in the end be arbitrary. Man must make his own values—out of nothing. There are indeed according to Sartre some people who attempt to conceal this state of affairs from themselves, by persuading themselves that some way of life or system of values is absolute, dictated by the world: but this is an illusion, and such people are merely trying to deny their freedom. They are, in Sartre’s phrase, ‘in bad faith’.
Existentialism is essentially concerned with problems of choice and personal commitment; and it is indeed one of its beliefs that it is only through direct personal living, the agencies of real choice, that anything can really be understood. Not surprisingly therefore writers like Sartre express their outlook as much through plays and novels as through formal works of philosophy, though Sartre and others also write such works.
Existentialism is a movement largely centred in France and Germany, and has very little influence in Great Britain. This is in part because the more philosophical or theoretical parts of Existentialism belong to a tradition of obscure metaphysical writing, having its origins in Germany, which has never appealed to the more pragmatic and literal-minded British thinkers. The most obscure of Existentialist thinkers, the German Martin Heidegger, would be thought by most British critics to be often writing what is quite literally nonsense. The more dramatic parts of Existentialism, on the other hand, its emphasis on the terrors of moral choice and the absence of any absolute principles of life, while they have relevance everywhere, naturally strike home hardest in countries where the political structure has in the recent past disintegrated or been overthrown. The French interest in Existentialism arose in the first place chiefly from the moral problems of the Resistance to the Germans in Occupied France.
These dramatic and personal aspects of Existentialism are probably of greater significance than its metaphysical theories. Even though Sartre and others have produced some important theoretical ideas, the main body of Existentialist theory is likely to appear to the future as a special and extreme type of German Romantic metaphysics rather than as a central contribution to the history of philosophy. The notion of ‘existential living’, however, with its emphasis on commitment, has certainly had a considerable impact on many people’s thoughts about values, and on their actions, and may continue to do so.
Sketch for a Theory of the Emotions, by Jean-Paul Sartre
This is a translation of a brief work that was published in 1939, and it is an excellent thing that it has appeared.1 It is of considerable interest in its own right, and also serves as a comparatively luminous introduction to some of the themes which Sartre pursues more portentously in Being and Nothingness. Not all readers may entirely agree with the blurb when it says that the essay ‘is nowhere an obscure or difficult work,’ but it is true that it has a special briskness and lightness of touch.
Sartre starts by criticising three existing theories of emotion—a ‘theory of emotion’ being a theory about what emotions essentially are, of what distinguishes them from other psychological happenings. The theories criticised are those of William James, that an emotion consists of consciousness of an internal physiological disturbance; of Pierre Janet, that emotion is ‘the behaviour of defeat’; and of certain Gestalt psychologists, that emotion (the example particularly considered is anger) is an escape from tension experienced in trying to ‘structure’ a recalcitrant environment. Of these theories, Sartre regards the third as better than the second, and the second as better than the first; we are approaching, without reaching the truth.
He then turns to criticism of psychoanalytic theories, the point of attack being the concept of the unconscious; this is a theme he has developed in later writings. From this, he moves to his own theory, which occupies the last forty or so pages of the book. The central idea of this is that emotion is a more primitive state of consciousness or way of seeing the world, the essence of which is that it embodies a belief in magic. The object of a fear, for instance, may be seen as horrible quite independently of any powers for harm it may be believed to have; the fact that the horrible face at the window is on the other side of the window just disappears in the state of terror.
More basically, the magical element occurs in the reactions of the man in the emotion; in fear we may faint, and this is a magical way of seeking to annihilate the object of fear—like a man faced with a difficult problem who just goes to sleep. The account is not supposed to apply only to negative emotions; with great ingenuity, Sartre applies the same ideas to joy, for instance, which he identifies as a magical way of trying to make simultaneous and complete satisfactions incomplete and successive.
As so often with Sartre, I find myself left at the end dazzled but doubtful. The cleverness and imagination are enormous, and sometimes one is convinced. But even where one is, there is a doubt about what one has been convinced of. This doubt goes back to Sartre’s method, the so-called ‘phenomenological’ method, which he took (with adaptations) from Husserl. The philosophy of this method is complex and not easy to make clear. Mrs. Mary Warnock, in a brief but helpful preface to this book, goes some way to making it clear, though I wonder whether—despite her disclaimers—she has not overestimated the genuine influence of Descartes on Sartre. For Descartes, mind or consciousness is something to be investigated independently of the world, by way of reflexion. With Sartre, for whom it is essential that consciousness does not have to be reflexive, that we can experience without thinking that we experience, we discover the activities of consciousness by giving a description of the world as it appears to consciousness: the activities of mind are, as it were, ‘read back’ from the world as it seems in different states of mind.
There are two great difficulties with this method. One is that the ‘activities’ of mind which are posited seem so often to be fictional; in Sartre all the time we are doing things—and, in one sense, consciously doing things—of which we are not aware. The other difficulty lies in evaluating the descriptions of the world as it seems. The world of, say, a frightened man may be described in many ways; is there any method of deciding which description is, for the purposes of this philosophy, the best, the one that gets nearest to the essence of fear? We may be able to get no further than seeing that some descriptions ‘come off’ and others do not. At any rate, some of Sartre’s do most resoundingly come off.2
Notes
1. Sketch for a Theory of the Emotions, by Jean-Paul Sartre, translated by Philip Mairet (Methuen, 1962).
2. This review originally appeared as “World As It Seems,” Spectator, August 3, 1962.
Sense and Sensibilia and Philosophical Papers, by J. L. Austin
Sense and Sensibilia consists of a course of lectures that Austin gave for several years, mostly skilfully stitched together from the notes by Mr Warnock.1 It is a remarkable book: original, clear, forceful, entertaining and salutary. It is bound to have, as Austin’s personal influence had, a considerable effect on the terms of philosophical discussion. After it, the philosophy of perception cannot be discussed in ways it usually was discussed before.
It is one of the peculiarities of philosophy, however, that the influence and genuine importance of a philosophical work can be remarkably independent of its actual success in doing what, in the narrower terms of its thesis and argument, it sets out to do. In the case of Sense and Sensibilia, it is not easy to determine just what it does set out to do; but of various aims that might plausibly be ascribed to it, only one really comes off. This is the aim, which serves as a thread running through the book, of showing that certain of the arguments used by Ayer in The Foundations of Empirical Knowledge do not work. Austin’s more important criticisms of these arguments are very effective; in particular he brings out, very briefly and clearly, an important circularity in Ayer’s approach (p. 60).
But Austin’s purpose, of course, was not just to criticise Ayer: he did not merely want to give, in lectures year after year, a hostile review of certain passages in a twenty-year-old book. A wider purpose, it seems, was to destroy a thesis of which Ayer’s book was one expression: the thesis that there are certain objects called ‘sense-data’, which we perceive in a way more direct or immediate than that in which we perceive tables, chairs, and so forth. This more general aim of refutation, if he really had it, Austin cannot be said to have accomplished. For one thing, he explicitly leaves out of consideration one important type of argument for sense-data, used by Ayer, and also by Price, whose book Perception is occasionally referred to: an argument from the causal conditions of perception (cf. p. 46, note 2). For another thing, he blandly ignores certain difficulties on which some philosophers (notably Moore) put a lot of weight in arguing for sense-data. We speak of seeing a star, and also of seeing a silvery speck; this silvery speck is one sort of thing that people have wanted to call ‘a sense-datum’. But, Austin asks, ‘wouldn’t we be prepared to say, and quite correct in saying, that the silvery speck is a star?’ (p. 92). Isn’t it just like kicking a piece of painted wood, and kicking Jones’ door (p. 98); or like seeing Hitler, and seeing a man in black trousers (p. 99)? Answer: no; for the reason that Austin himself gives us, undisturbedly, in discussing another example (p. 98, note)—that though I may say ‘that white dot on the horizon is my house’, this does not license the conclusion that I live in a white dot. But if I live behind Jones’ door, I live behind that piece of wood, and if (alarmingly) I lived with Hitler, I lived with that man in black trousers. That is to say, the analogies supposed to show simple identity here do not work; and it is precisely this fact that has inspired an important sort of talk about sense-data. Sense-data are, in fact, a pretty dead duck by now; but if the duck has any life in it, Austin’s arguments are not enough to finish it off.
However, this may not matter so much. Perhaps, after all, his concern with the sense-datum theorists is only incidental. He has a still more general aim: to illustrate how philosophers tend to obliterate important distinctions, to ignore the diversity of the facts, and to take little notice of how our language actually works. For this aim, the examples of some arguments about sense-data will do. Austin repeatedly claims that these arguments fail because they ignore the vast variety of relevant situations, and also the distinctions between many different linguistic expressions, and uses of the same expression, that apply to those situations. Now it seems to be Austin’s thesis that the first of these neglects is in some way due to the second: that the crude Gleichschaltung of importantly different situations has been caused by philosophers’ neglecting subtle distinctions in the ordinary use of language. Part of the general aim of the book might be taken to be that of showing this connection.
If so, it is once more very doubtful whether Austin succeeds. His own practice does not do much to bear out the connection. For instance, Austin points out that Ayer and others have tended to use ‘material object’ merely as a foil to ‘sense-datum’, and have implied that anything that (roughly) is publicly perceptible is a material object. This he rightly criticizes—not, however, by talking about the uses of ‘material’, or of ‘perceive’, but by just reminding us of how many sorts of things we can see, hear, etc. Conversely Austin does some subtle work of distinguishing uses of ‘looks’, ‘seems’ and ‘appears’ in their various constructions, displaying in this the fine linguistic ear which was one of his outstanding gifts. But this set of distinctions is not at all closely tied into the argument; in particular, he does not show at all how neglect of them has misled the sense-datum theorists. It would be odd, prima facie, if, for some of these usages, he could do so, since they have nothing specially to do with perception at all.
In general, it is remarkable how little Austin uses his methods of close linguistic observation to support the specifically philosophical points that he makes, such as his claims that there are no incorrigible statements, and that there is no intrinsic relation between two statements which is that of one’s being evidence for the other. Correspondingly, the linguistic observations seem often to be pursued for their own sake. This impression is borne out by various pieces in the Philosophical Papers, in which Messrs Urmson and Warnock have assembled all Austin’s published, and three unpublished, papers.2 Moreover, there are in this book some pointers to why this detachment of philosophy and linguistic study should occur: there is a good deal to suggest that Austin actively wanted in his linguistic studies, to get away from philosophical problems. This, then, is why the sense-datum theorists get such incomplete treatment; Austin’s aim was to remove, not so much belief in their answers, as interest in their questions.
There was, however, to be a way back to philosophy. The linguistic study would lead back eventually to the subjects which the philosophical theorists had over-rapidly attacked—it was to be, in a famous phrase, the ‘begin-all’. How was the ‘begin-all’ to be pursued? Austin’s answer to this seems to have been a Baconian one: that one patiently assembled distinctions in ordinary use, and then elicited from them a pattern or theory—perhaps at that stage, but only at that stage, introducing some technical terms of one’s own. The trouble about this is, that if it is taken literally, it is just impossible. There is no classification without a purpose—in theoretical matters, without a theory or a problem. Without some preexisting notion of what one wants the distinctions for, their number is entirely indeterminate: one can go on making as many as one likes. Sometimes, indeed, Austin seems just to be making some distinctions which take his fancy. Often, however, Austin in fact had a firm idea at the beginning what he wanted the distinctions to do, and assembled them accordingly; and because he was a man of great philosophical insight, the assembly is often illuminating. Without the insight, the same activity is boring and pointless; he had not discovered, any more than Bacon had, a method that could be handed over to mechanics to churn out results.
Apart from the way in which the activity was to be conducted, what was the point of it? Why all this close scrutiny of ordinary uses? Here we meet a curious view of Austin’s, which might be called his ‘Wisdom of the Ages’ thesis: that our ordinary speech contains a battery of distinctions that men have found useful through the centuries, and which have stood the test of time, and that these are likely to be sounder than any which a theorist can—at least when in a hurry—think up. There is a strong prima facie case for thinking that our ordinary working distinctions are very good anyway; and if we are to improve on them—as it is possible that we might, in some cases—we have at the very least to discover what they are first (cf. Sense and Sensibilia, p. 63; Papers, p. 133 et al.).
This view, of course, already presupposes some substantial positions about the nature of philosophy, to the effect that a certain kind of speculative philosophy, the kind that tried to show that men were quite mistaken about some fundamental features of the world, is impossible. If all these distinctions had been elaborated under a gigantic misapprehension, there could scarcely be much point in studying them. Thus the view takes for granted a whole lot of arguments right from the beginning. But since it shares this presupposition with most views at the present time, and with many at others, and since (to put it mildly) it is a presupposition for which there is something to be said, this is not the most interesting point about Austin’s view. A more interesting question is that of its conservatism, even within the range of philosophy that is not enormously speculative. Now the charge that Austin was a linguistic conservative has been made, and has been rebutted by reminding us that the study of existing uses was indeed a ‘begin-all’—after the investigation, then possibly reform. But this is still, in fact, conservatism. It is particularly so if conjoined with the Baconian thesis about the methods of investigation, for on that thesis, the investigation will be literally interminable. Even without that, it is conservative. It amounts to the proposal that no revolution or even reform can be mounted without a thorough sociological investigation of the ancien régime; and this is a proposal which in other contexts is rightly regarded as amounting to the proposal that there be no reform.
If Austin’s advice had prevailed in the past, there would have been very little philosophy. This, perhaps, he would not have deplored. But there is a further question: if these Burkean counsels had been followed, would we now have a good number of the distinctions and usages that we do have in ordinary language? For who was it who laid down this intricate web of linguistic institutions? Austin writes vaguely of ‘the inherited experience and acumen of many generations of men … [in] the practical business of life’ (Papers, p. 133). But don’t we need some real historical material about the changes in language? Above all, about the repeated impact on it, particularly in the fields Austin was most concerned with, of the despised hasty theorists? In language, as in politics, the conservative runs into the fact that the old is only what used to be new.
There are other ways in which Austin’s attitude to language seems historically unrealistic. Sometimes his respect for the old seems to cloud his natural appreciation of the realities and vaguenesses of lexicography, and his tone reminds one almost of another Burke, that of the Peerage; as when he writes of ‘our vast and, for the most part, relatively ancient stock of ordinary words’ (Sense and Sensibilia, p. 63: my italics). What is the antiquity of a word? How ancient, for example, is the word ‘idea’?
I suspect that the Wisdom of the Ages thesis is in fact a myth, a fanciful picture of the past designed to justify certain activities in the present. Austin was fascinated by, and extraordinarily gifted in detecting, nuances of ordinary speech. He also had great philosophical imagination and acumen. He sought to bring the two together, by urging the study of ordinary use as the method of philosophy, or at least a method necessarily preliminary to philosophy. At the theoretical level, I do think he succeeded. In his practice, it is notable that he often scarcely tried. When he did try, and succeeded, it was above all at the level of persuasion, in his extremely skilful deployment of fine linguistic distinctions as a weapon to encourage—or, more characteristically, to discourage—the holding of certain philosophical beliefs.
In this use of philosophical dissuasion, there is an obvious parallel with the later Wittgenstein. Neither had any faith in the older aspirations to philosophical proof; both urged patience and the recognition of untidy complexities; both substituted for older styles a persuasive method that was more effective in their own hands than it is (at least in a pure form) in the hands of others. They were, however, at completely opposite ends of the psychological spectrum in philosophy. The aim of Wittgenstein’s method was illumination; its highest term of commendation, ‘depth’; its fault, allusive obscurity. Austin—who carried to really remarkable lengths the English dislike of pretentiousness—sought plain truth; by way of accuracy; and the danger was pedantry. To which of these ways one is more attracted must be a question of temperament. But it must be said—as Popper rightly insists—that no branch of human thought has ever advanced by making its watchword just the accumulation of as many truths as possible, accurately expressed. These two remarkable books would not be as interesting and valuable if Austin had taken himself, as he insisted on taking other philosophers, literally.
Notes
1. Sense and Sensibilia, by J. L. Austin, reconstructed by G. J. Warnock (Clarendon Press, 1962).
2. Philosophical Papers, by J. L. Austin, edited by J. O. Urmson and G. J. Warnock (Clarendon Press, 1961).
The Concept of a Person, by A. J. Ayer
This book of essays (four new and five reprinted) gives a very good view of Professor Ayer’s present philosophical situation, which is an interesting one.1 It is now a long time since he gave up any large-scale adherence to the logical positivism that he originally expounded in that dazzling book, Language, Truth, and Logic, but he retains a loyalty to certain features of positivism. This can take the form of a nostalgic attachment to specific doctrines, and then it tends to have a Quixotic ring. In the first of these papers, which was his inaugural lecture at Oxford given in 1960, he says ‘for my part I have no wish to disown the verification principle, though it suffers from a vagueness which it has not yet been found possible to eradicate’; and this indeed is pure loyalty, since it is a long time since anyone, including Ayer, has worked to improve the verification principle, and it is obvious, from this paper itself and also from others in the book, that he is no longer interested in it.
These infrequent gestures towards the Clause Four of his philosophy are unimportant. What is important, and very stimulating, is his adherence to something else: a general temper of philosophical argument which he showed in his positivist period, and which is not that most frequently met with today. Although positivism did, in an untypical way, have this tone, it belongs most typically to a philosopher who has never been a positivist, Bertrand Russell. The literary style of this book—which contains some of the best of Ayer’s excellent writing—often reminds one of Russell, though with less surface brilliance, fewer jokes, and a greater devotion to painstaking argument. There are also beliefs that he shares with Russell: for instance, that philosophical conclusions can be straightforwardly (well, fairly straightforwardly) true or false, and can be shown to be so by argument; and that it is appropriate to speak of those conclusions that have not yet been shown to be true or false as though they were hypotheses, probable or improbable, well or ill-supported.
These are not the most prevalent beliefs in philosophy today; the ways of speaking that go with them cause many philosophers discomfort. The two thinkers who have most influenced British philosophy in the last 15 years, Wittgenstein and J. L. Austin, both did a lot, in different ways, to bring this about. Wittgenstein, though entirely involved in philosophy, doubted whether it could offer truths; Austin, in pursuit of truths, doubted whether they were to be found in philosophy. Wittgenstein developed an informal but very powerful style of reflection which sought insight into the origins of philosophical problems; Austin, up to his untimely death in 1960, devoted himself in good part to the accurate study of certain linguistic expressions in common use, hoping, it seems, by these means to by-pass traditional centres of philosophical argument and confusion.
Ayer is evidently sceptical about both these influences; and the interest of his situation is that, Wittgenstein and Austin having gone, he finds himself, at the height of his powers, sustaining philosophical methods that both of them had known very well, and had rejected. With Austin, there is perhaps no very great difficulty: his considerable, though unfinished, contribution is something that one can to some extent take or leave, and Ayer leaves most of it. With Wittgenstein, the problem is harder. His impact, both on the spirit of philosophy and on some particular issues, was enormous, and cannot be ignored. The problem, of the departed genius who has apparently dissolved one’s own idiom, is just there—Ayer is the Brahms to Wittgenstein’s Wagner.
The most superficial difficulty about this situation is that one may appear to the modish a bit old-fashioned. Ayer does not mind this at all, but on the contrary enjoys it; his enthusiasm for shocking the establishment (another resemblance to Russell) has merely found a newer object. (This enthusiasm has indeed led him, in this book, to make a curious slip: in the paper called ‘Names and Descriptions’ he criticises, from a Russellian point of view, what he calls ‘a fashionable theory of reference’, which, although it has been recently favoured, in fact belongs essentially to Frege, and is older than Russell’s.) However, an enthusiastic refusal to succumb cannot be enough by itself; it needs substantial backing.
Ayer provides backing; his methods justify themselves, if not always to the same extent. Some of the pieces treat topics over which Wittgenstein’s shadow falls less densely, and most of these are a great success; the ones on probability, laws of nature, and fatalism, for instance, are splendid examples of clear, straightforward and powerful argument. Elsewhere, as in the title piece and one called ‘Can there be a Private Language?’, he is nearer to Wittgenstein’s main topics and his influence, and here I find that although the same virtues are often displayed, the outcome is less satisfactory. There is one particularly important reason for this. Ayer is still very attached to what was a thesis of positivism, and before that, of Hume, that any connection between two propositions or states of affairs must be either purely logical, a matter of meaning and definition, or else merely contingent, a matter of fact. Wittgenstein in effect rejected this axiom: the connection, for instance, between a feeling and its overt expression he regarded as neither of these (and not ‘synthetic a priori’, either). Now it is certainly true that his views on this have never been clearly formulated. But too much of what he says, it seems to me, is illuminating for one to suppose that there is nothing there at all, that it is all a big mistake. Whatever it is that is in the shadow, Ayer has not finally come to grips with it.
His failure to do so, however, is not an evasion. For what is particularly impressive about this book is its honesty. Even when Ayer hurries, as he sometimes does, he is not hurrying by on the other side. In the self-conscious commitment to his methods, there is nothing fake or fudged or done merely for effect. In this also, as in historical position—if in nothing else whatsoever—Ayer is like Brahms.
Note
1. The Concept of a Person, by A. J. Ayer (Macmillan, 1963).
Two Faces of Science
What are the two faces of science? At one level, it is just that we have a notion of science as technological power, which is by its very nature ambiguous, and which can be used, as preachers and others remind us every day, for good or for ill—bacteriological research for saving life or for germ warfare, nuclear energy for power-stations or for bombs. This is the most familiar form of the conflict between two aspects of science—the contrast between good and evil uses of technology. But although it is the most familiar form, I am sure it is not the only one, and fairly sure that it is not the most fundamental. Because, first of all, one certainly has not given an adequate account of the fear that many people have of technological progress if one just points out that technological discoveries can have evil uses. What may frighten them more deeply, in a way, is not so much the evil uses of technology as the evil consequences of its good uses; for we all know that we ought to be avoiding the evil uses, but of course are only too happy to pursue the good uses, with the alarming consequences they may entail: consequences which in the popular imagination may run all the way from the relatively immediate problems of unemployment due to automation, through to pictures of a future society in which we may be able to live indefinitely, construct in advance a genetic programme for our children, and educate them by direct causal action on their brains: all with results that we are afraid to dream about.
But even when one has added in these elements, I still do not think one has fully expressed the conflict between the light and the dark sides of our latent idea of science. For all this is still concerned with science as a means; it is concerned with science as technology. But I do not think that on either side, the positive or the negative, can the conflict be put as simply as this implies. For, on the one hand, there is certainly a prestige, an excitement, a cultural and intellectual value, which is thought, and rightly thought, to attach to science independently of its technological output. And on the negative side there is the point that this very excitement and human satisfaction involved in the scientific process can undermine the simple relations of means and ends; it can bring it about that we never find ourselves just in the situation of being able to decide how or whether to use certain scientific means. There is the fear, at least, that inherent in the impetus of scientific advance itself is a certain necessity that those means which are possible will be discovered, and those means that have been discovered will be used.
But let us go back to the positive side. There is in present society a genuine cultural enthusiasm for the idea of science itself, and in particular for the pure sciences. Why this is so is a complex question, involving, among other things, the economic basis of modern society, and its effects on people’s attitudes. But why it ought to be so seems to me, on the other hand, a very easy question to answer, at least if you are prepared, as I am, to answer it in an unabashed high-minded way: it is because the achievements of the natural sciences represent in our age the highest intellectual and imaginative achievements of man, that is to say our highest cultural achievements.
As soon as I use the word ‘cultural’ like that, there are people who, like Hermann Goering, reach for their gun; and we immediately find ourselves in the now desolated intellectual no-man’s land of the so-called ‘two cultures’. I am not going to attempt the discouraging task of putting together the ruins that litter the ground there. But since this is a personal view, let me dogmatically state a position. Sir Charles Snow was quite right, in my view, to draw attention, as Lord Russell and others had done before him, to a certain anomaly in our intellectual life. One is not generally regarded in intellectual circles as an educated or cultivated person unless one has, for instance, some conception of what the Middle Ages or the Renaissance stand for, or of what was done by Dante, or Titian, or Goethe, or Beethoven; and so too, for contemporary artists. But it is not in the same way always regarded as an occasion for cultivated embarrassment if ignorance is shown, or even declared, of the achievements of Galileo, or Newton, or Mendel, or (in the present time) of relativity theory or molecular biology. This state of affairs is certainly absurd: absurd for more than one reason.
The Enemy of Parochialism
I take it that a chief aim of culture and education of any kind is to be the enemy of parochialism: that by knowledge both of fact in general and of man’s achievements at other times and in other places one can form a juster assessment of one’s own place and the place of one’s society in the scheme of things. These general considerations about any sort of culture evidently apply to science, both in respect of the history of science and of certain present conclusions, theories, and also methods, of the sciences. The history is important, as part of what man has achieved; the present state is important, because parochialism will hardly have been resisted, if while one has some general conception of how one’s society has evolved from other societies, as may be taught by the humane discipline of history, one nevertheless has no conception, or at least no living and effective conception, of how man himself evolved, for instance, or of the place of his planet in the universe.
But this is not the only point: for there is another sense of ‘culture’ in which to speak of a common culture is to speak of men sympathizing in and sharing some common aim, and living in an environment which is commonly understood. And whatever the difficulties of such conceptions in modern society, it is certain that men cannot fare well if they are cut off from an understanding of the methods and results of those activities that provide the central achievements of their time; or even, to go to a lower level, if they cannot comprehend, at least in outline, the nature and workings of the mere mechanical devices with which they are surrounded. They will be living in an alien world.
To these sorts of arguments—and they are familiar enough—it is often replied that there just is a barrier against understanding; that those not formally educated in the natural sciences can never attain to anything but superficial misunderstanding of them, and that this is on intellectual grounds disreputable, and worse than useless. The merit of this reply seems to me to depend on who advances it. If a specialist in one branch of science condemns as superficial the understanding of that branch by a non-expert, I will sympathize with him; for one knows that any expert in anything will inevitably so regard non-expert understanding, and, within his frame of reference, rightly so. But this point, of course, applies as much to relations between different scientists as it does to those between scientists and others. We have got into the habit of talking about ‘science’ as though it were one big thing that you are either inside or out of, but this is a mistake: there are sciences, and branches of the same science, and experts in one may have at most nodding acquaintance with the work in others. Yet scientists in different disciplines, unless themselves very narrow men, do think it worth while to have a little understanding of other scientists’ work. So why not others? When the objection—nowadays usually put in the tempting form ‘it is an insult to science to treat it superficially’—is advanced by non-scientists, it has all the characteristics of a psychological defence-mechanism. For they are demanding in this case what they do not demand in any other: expert knowledge, or no knowledge at all. But in no other cultural field whatsoever is such a ridiculous demand made. The knowledge that most of us have of the Middle Ages would be regarded as shallow and inadequate by an undergraduate specializing in that period; our knowledge of the history of art, by an art-historian; of music, by a musicologist: yet those bits of knowledge, giving us some general sense of how things go in those areas, are worth having.
But I do not accept the ‘two cultures’ formulation, and in particular I do not accept that the issue is at all just about those who have had some sort of scientific training versus those who have not. For in the sense that I care about the cultural significance of scientific achievement, a feeling for this may be as effectively lacking in those who have had scientific training as in those who have not. I have myself talked to groups of students in the sciences, both in technology and in the pure sciences, and been alarmed by the lack, in some of them, of any such feeling. Competent technically, they had no feeling for the history, role, or basic nature of their activities; science as one great human activity and achievement among others—for this is what it is—meant little to them.
Nor is this entirely confined to students; nor—and this is actually more dangerous—does this lack of understanding only take the form of having no views on the human significance of scientific and technological processes. There are some people—and I must emphasize, in case it is not already totally obvious, that I mean only a very few among the scientists and technologists I have met—who do have a set of very passionate views on such issues; views, however, which are not illuminated by any general understanding of historical or social matters, and which these people falsely think can be supported from science itself. These views come roughly to saying that technological progress is all; that a tough-minded utilitarianism is the only acceptable social philosophy; that there cannot be any free will and hence, it is supposed, present conceptions of justice and so forth are archaic, and to be replaced by techniques of social control. And occasionally, in their headier moments, they add that since only technologists understand these matters and are free from archaic illusions, they ought to have a much larger say in what happens. This set of views, just put baldly like that, is a caricature; but in a few cases at least the caricature comes uncomfortably close to the truth. And what is certain is that such a caricature plays a role in what I called earlier the negative aspect of our latent idea of science; this is one thing that frightens, when we think about a certain impetus in technological advance itself to produce an inhuman world.
Though it is a familiar point, it cannot be said too often that the sorts of views I have just caricatured, whatever merits they may or may not have, are in no sense whatsoever part or consequences of any natural science or technological application of it, and to suppose that they are is not only a philosophical mistake but grossly unscientific as well. To make it clear that science by itself cannot give us the clue to the social future is one task of those who educate scientists; just as it is a task for those who educate the others to make it clear that without some knowledge and sympathy with the sciences no one will understand the social future, or the past or present either. I do not think that these educational tasks need be quite as difficult as many people have been making out. Looking more closely at the ambiguous face of science, it is not so hard to see how it is in the highest sense one among human activities.
The English Moralists, by Basil Willey
This book has emerged from a course of lectures which the author gave, as he rather dauntingly informs us in the Preface, for more than thirty years in the University of Cambridge.1 The course of lectures and the examination paper that it serves were conceived at a time—as Willey mentions—when the remnants of a pure aestheticism made it less than fashionable to attempt to relate literature and morality. They continued—though this he does not mention—through a period when his colleague in Cambridge, F. R. Leavis, was indeed relating literature to morality, but in a way that still gave little scope to the reflective history of moral ideas: the morality to which Leavis relates literature is a morality, a particular kind of outlook which, being identified with the essence of creative literary sensibility itself, becomes the basis of a peculiarly timeless kind of criticism.
Thus Willey, in more than one climate of opinion, has kept alive the connections between the study of English literature and the history of ideas. From his efforts there has come a string of sturdy and not unworthy books: the Seventeenth and Eighteenth Century Backgrounds, the Nineteenth Century Studies. They, too, got some of their matter from this persistent course of lectures, and the lecture-room tone, it must be said, is often present in their helpful summaries of reported writers. Now, in the year of his retirement from the King Edward VII Chair of English Literature, Willey has cleaned up the rest of his accumulated notes and published them as The English Moralists, both as a memorial of the years’ activities, and with the hope (typical of a certain Cambridge introversion) that the book may help his successors, “if only as a historical atlas or as an awful warning,” in guiding the future course of these same lectures.
It would be ungracious of Willey’s successors, whoever they may be, to take him up too peremptorily on the second, at least, of these preferred interpretations. Yet perhaps it will be better if they do. There is, very obviously, no recipe for valuable writing in the history of ideas, no substantial maxims to make sure that what is written will be helpful or illuminating. But there are at least a few crude necessary conditions that one may look for, such as accuracy (to a reasonable degree) and absence of prejudice (of an unreasonable sort), and these conditions Willey satisfies only intermittently. This is because there are two substantial matters which, in quite different ways, he has not got under control: philosophy and Christianity.
Philosophy he puts down right at the beginning with some bravado:
The “English Moralists” paper has been criticized as “amateur moral science,” but I find it difficult to take that criticism seriously. It has been demonstrated over and over again that the “history of ideas” is not something which people with a literary training cannot grasp. They do not need to be professional philosophers in order to attain such knowledge, or enough of it to enrich and illuminate their literary studies.
(“Moral science,” I should perhaps explain, is Cambridge’s term for philosophy.)
What Willey says here is not exactly untrue; but the extent to which it is true depends very much on what sort of history of ideas is in question, both the sort of ideas, and the sort of history. The kind of approach that comes from a concentration on philosophy will not perhaps be at a premium in studying ideas whose chief and most influential expression is not to be found in philosophers: the idea of progress, possibly, or the contemporary idea of honesty with oneself as a supreme moral ideal (the history of which is not yet written). Again, there may be a point for the history of ideas in not approaching even philosophers too philosophically; too nice a concentration on what they actually meant may disguise the influence that derived from their being misunderstood, and with some philosophers, Rousseau for instance, this is all-important. Yet while this is so, there will be some paradox in ignoring philosophy too much; for how is one to chart the misunderstandings, without philosophical understanding of what the philosopher really meant? At this point, there emerges the shallowness of Willey’s approach, with its academic classifications of “literary training” and “professional philosophers.” The truth, though simple, is more complex than the syllabus: that philosophical insight is not something separate from the literary understanding of philosophical writing, because it is not separate from understanding philosophical writing at all. Nor can there be a history of ideas without identification of ideas; and to identify what ideas are embodied in a text, particularly a philosopher’s text, is no less a matter of philosophical comprehension than of anything else (which does not mean that those with “a literary training” are debarred from reaching it).
Willey in fact adopts, of all possible courses, the one for which his professed lack of philosophical knowledge, and his evident lack of philosophical sense, least suits him: he gives up a good part of his book to trying just to state, as briefly as possible, the views of various philosophers. This is not a fruitful activity at best; under the present auspices, the outcome is a sustained exercise in missing the point. Two of the more important sufferers are Locke and Hume. Locke’s views on primary and secondary qualities, on substance, on revelation, and on the will, are variously mis-stated, misunderstood, or over-simplified; while some dark hints about “moral relativity” in his ethics are left untroubled by any statement of the fact that Locke actually aspired to make ethics into an a priori science. Locke is a confused thinker, indeed, but not boringly so, because his confusions are those of a highly intelligent and honest man trying to stand upright on intellectual ground that is shifting under his feet; Willey’s disservice is to make him dreary.
Hume inspires a rather more lively treatment, but it is no more accurate: important arguments (on the sense of duty and on miracles) are so stated as to omit precisely the basic idea, and Willey seems ignorant of important work on the interpretation of Hume, notably Kemp Smith’s on the Dialogues on Natural Religion. Hume is not in any case likely to get discriminating treatment, since, apart from the subtlety of his philosophy, he is an ironist, and irony seems in general to jam Willey’s apparatus: both Gulliver’s Travels and Candide are very crudely handled.
Willey’s insensibility to irony is equally apparent in his dealings with Aristotle, whose Magnanimous Man he takes for the ideal of the system. This interpretation has been accepted by some people; but it is surely mistaken and it scarcely gains much authority from Willey, who is prepared to say that the Ethics is one of “the world’s most boring classics.”
Aristotle is in fact the victim of something more interesting than misinterpretation: he is the prime casualty to Willey’s ideology, a sternly Protestant Christianity, which is expounded, relied on, and—consistently with its own spirit—very little analyzed. It sets the tone for the whole historical enterprise, the basic tradition of our civilization being found in a Platonic-Augustinian dualism, very disadvantageous to the flesh: man is a composite being, torn between impulses towards the higher and the carnal. No wonder that Aristotle, of less Manichaean disposition, gets such short shrift. Bad luck on the history of ideas that identifies either of these traditions as the guiding thread of Western thought. Even in the Middle Ages, the doctrine is in trouble, trouble which Willey gratuitously compounds for himself by claiming that “throughout the Middle Ages [Aristotle] was not merely an authority, but the authority.” This falsehood is mildly qualified on a later page; but Aristotle stays in the center, and it remains obscure whether Willey allows the Middle Ages to have been Aristotelian, because they were Christian, or is ready to admit that they were Aristotelian, because he himself is Protestant.
The ideologue can write history, even the history of what he rejects; the Enlightenment, for example, can be effectively studied by one who, as Willey does, regards the doctrine of Original Sin as a sure demonstration that all its ideals are hopeless. But such a study requires a complex feat of self-denial, a willing suspension of belief, a determination not to preach. In this Willey totally fails, with the result that parts of his book read like the grotesque sermon of a school chaplain warning the senior boys against the spiritual shortcomings of purely secular writings.
It is an ironical point that another of Willey’s Cambridge colleagues, Herbert Butterfield, shares Willey’s religious outlook, but bases on it an attitude to history which is totally, indeed extremely, the contrary: because of the pervasive sinfulness of man (as well as for other reasons) the historian must make no moral comment. A word from Butterfield would be valuable to any zealot who succeeds Willey in that famous course of lectures.
Note
1. The English Moralists, by Basil Willey (Norton, 1964).
Universities: Protest, Reform and Revolution
It seemed right to try to say something about the discontents and student protests which have been, in Britain as elsewhere, troubling the universities; and certainly to undertake some discourse on the nature, purpose, role or whatever of universities, which did not take seriously the basic questions raised by what is going on, would be an idiotic evasion. However, I realise that in giving a lecture on these issues one runs a special risk of being tedious: on the one hand because events are running very fast, and problems which seem absolutely central at one point may even shortly afterwards seem less urgent or important; on the other hand, because many of the issues which obviously are central have already been so extensively discussed in public, and by many of us almost obsessionally in private, that one may well wonder whether anything remains to be said, and whether one may not be too groggy to recognise it if there is.
At least, in face of that difficulty, I shall be selective, and will leave out a lot of relevant things, resisting in particular (you may be relieved to hear) the temptations of a priori sociological explanation—why student protest has specially appeared so far at some institutions rather than at others, and at this time rather than earlier; to what extent, also, the causes to which it addresses itself are also the causes of its happening. On this last point, I shall assume only that many at least of the causes to which it addresses itself are worth taking seriously; this would seem to me to be so even if some of the motive power of protest comes from deeper or more general sources. I don’t think that any theory—historical, sociological, or even perhaps zoological—of why the banners are being raised is going to absolve one from honestly considering what is written on them.
Recent student protest has, obviously enough, been directed to two different sorts of issues, some of them concerned with how the university itself should be run, some of them with international or national political issues and a critique of the society in which the university exists. This last phrase itself shows, of course, that the two sorts of issue are by no means distinct, a point which radical protest insists upon. For one thing, internal disciplinary issues and questions of student freedom are very often precipitated by protests directed at the political issues; for another thing, protests against the university’s system are often seen as protests against features of society itself. I shall be saying some more about those more radical endeavours later on. For the moment, however, I should like to consider one or two of the issues that bear most directly on the university’s own structure and operation.
The joint statement of the NUS [National Union of Students] and the Vice-Chancellors, though it showed at various points, not surprisingly, thumb-prints from the heavy hand of compromise, seemed to me to offer many sensible suggestions; and I am going to start from the assumption that at least that much should be acceptable to university teachers and administrators. Anyone who is root and branch opposed to student participation in any university body except student societies and, perhaps, a joint catering committee, I shall not seek to persuade. The question seems to me about methods and limitations, and what principles should govern them, and the lines to be found between student participation, student freedom and student control. One such line that looks inviting, and is often invoked, is a line between the academic aspects of student life and its social aspects. It is often said, and very reasonably, that university authorities should be less fussed than many of them have been in the past with the regulation of students’ private lives, and that we should see an end to the battery of regulations still to be found in some places concerning where students go, when they come in, where they sleep and with whom. Moreover, where regulation is required, that a lot more of it should be totally delegated or left in the hands of students themselves, rather than handed down from on high. It looks as though many of us, though doubtless not all, may be able to agree on that general direction, without prejudice to what we may think about courses, examinations, syllabus and so forth.
I certainly think the general direction a sound one; and when the recommendations of the Latey Report on the age of majority are put into law, the legal decks will be cleared for treating students as adults. But in taking that view, one has got to be aware of certain consequences, and also of certain limitations which are going to be encountered, at least unless the system is changed in remoter respects. If one is not aware of these limitations, one courts the illusion endemic to mere liberalism, that change can be quite painless, and that the mere removal of old-fashioned restrictions will leave everything in just the same space that it was in before, only with a bit more room to move around in it. One courts also the nemesis of that illusion: the situation in which, discovering change after all to involve some pain, and that it all has a tendency to go further and in different directions than expected, panic sets in, the wheels of liberalisation are thrown into reverse, and one has the classic formula for a revolution. I offer here no argument for conservatism—only against sentimentality. Conservatism indeed has this one true premiss, that significant changes have unexpected consequences; but from that it invalidly derives its own illusion, that you can avoid unexpected happenings by seeking to avoid change. I am only saying that if introducing significant change, one had better expect the unexpected; and it helps to give some thought about what directions one should look in for its arrival.
In this matter of student freedom and self-determination in social matters, I shall mention just two directions in which I think we ought to be looking; there are certainly others besides. First, I think we have to give some thought to the question of how we reconcile this line with another aspiration that many have, towards a greater involvement of students and teachers together, and a less distant, less purely functional, relation of teachers to students than is found in some universities. For as things actually are, it looks as though the two things do not go together, but rather the contrary. The universities in which there is least fuss and control, by the very nature of things, over students’ private activities, are large, non-residential, urban institutions, in which students cram into lodgings, flats, studios, attics, in an unsupervised way, and lead—if they are lucky and not just doomed to loneliness—some autonomous kind of student life. Equally, and by the same token, they roll up for classes with teachers with whom they do not share (except in special cases) much of their private life, the teachers having likewise rolled up from leading, in the suburbs or wherever, some autonomous kind of teachers’ life. Opposed to this, we have a picture of the residential, organic university, with college life and free timeless converse between students and teachers; and those are just the places with the gating rules, one-sex colleges, and the Senior Tutor hiding behind the dustbins to catch them climbing over the wall.
Of course, both of these pictures are caricatures—and very much so the second. Nevertheless, they stand for a genuine conflict of aims which may not be irresoluble, but does need to be resolved. A very senior teacher from my university was reported in The Times recently as having criticised, in a speech to a society for the very intelligent, the younger generation of university teachers for being too concerned with their academic careers, and not enough with their pupils; married young, with small children, concentrated on research and publication, they left the undergraduates alone as much as possible. He was comparing the situation, I believe, with an older Oxbridge style, and of course in terms of that comparison there is much in what he says. But is that older style what a student would want now? Would the splendidly dedicated old don make much sense in the style of student freedom which is now sought, or in the institutions required to realise it? May not students, in a good number of respects, like being left alone to an extent which the older school would regard as involving a failure of tutorial responsibility?
I am afraid the answer to that last question is both yes and no, which is why there is a conflict of aims here. There is indeed one replacement for the old bachelor don, in terms of the more liberated and autonomous student life: namely, the young bachelor—or at least unfamilied—teacher, little older than the students, who spontaneously shares the style, social or political, that they favour. But his, in the nature of things, cannot be a general solution, for mere reasons of age; and we know from recent experience that the situation has its own difficulties, sometimes involving—to put a contentious issue in the antiseptic language of the social sciences—a certain confusion of roles.
I do not want to suggest that there is any large-scale or insoluble difficulty in these points. I do think, however, that one image of a university which goes very naturally with the aspirations to a less regulated student life clashes with an image which is on other grounds favoured; and such a conflict of images, if not made conscious and resolved as best it may be, is just the sort of thing that can leave people disorientated and in disarray.
The other matter that I think we ought to keep carefully in mind when moving towards student control of social arrangements refers particularly to discipline. Student participation in disciplinary committees and provisions of that type commands much assent; and it may be suggested further—indeed, it certainly has been suggested—that in some areas it is perfectly reasonable to put disciplinary control entirely into the hands of students. It may be that arrangements of this sort will prove, for certain purposes, entirely workable, and I myself certainly would not want to discount them in advance. But I felt that a colleague of mine had a point, who remarked that what chiefly worried him about such proposals was a fear that student bodies might prove too severe: a certain Jacobin dogmatism might make it go hard with students whose way of life or interests went in the currently disapproved direction. If there is anything to this, there may well be a case for retaining senior member participation in disciplinary procedures.
There is in any case the administrative point that the exaction of the penalties (unless they are of a very rough and ready sort) is likely to devolve on university authorities. But there is also the more general reason, that this may well be one of the areas in which the difference between senior members and junior members, that senior members go on for longer while junior members come and go, has some immediate relevance. This difference has been cited so often in connections where its relevance is not very obvious, that it has become a somewhat discredited observation, and its utterance virtually identified with a conservative reflex. But there are some connections in which it really is relevant, and this looks like one of them. For a student who finds himself in a certain climate of opinion, this just is the climate of the university: his experience of what it is like to be in a university is necessarily shaped by it. Senior members have an experience shaped by changes of climate, and while this can no doubt contribute to all those middle-aged deformations of cynicism, conservatism and so forth, it can also give rise to a fairly lively sense of the sorts of institutions and practices which can go on working fairly under shifting conditions, as the ideological wind blows with varying strengths in varying directions.
I turn now to one or two questions about student involvement in more academic matters, in particular matters of syllabus. Here again, there are some directions of reform which I for one, and I should suppose many here, would regard as highly reasonable. Thus it is entirely reasonable that students’ opinions and doubts about what is taught, should have some serious notice taken of them; and if it is felt that no notice gets taken of them if they are voiced individually and informally, then one will have, even if reluctantly, to invent some rather more formal machinery to convey them.
Two qualifications: of which the first is, that students must realise (and almost all students I have talked to do realise it) that they themselves have to see to it that the channels of communication are not overloaded with vast quantities of repetitious material. It really is not an essential test of an academic’s good faith, that he is prepared to be bored into the ground. If things get like that, anyone who is any good will go away, certainly from the meeting; and in the really long and terrible run, from that university.
The second qualification is that if students have the right to say to staff that they do not like the courses in these or those respects, and that they would like things to be done differently, the staff also has the right, if they happen to think that the students are talking ill-informed rubbish, to tell them so. It should hardly be necessary to say this; but there is a very odd view which one sometimes meets, some paternalist hang-over, according to which students should be allowed to say anything they like, but—since they are only students, after all—one should refrain from harsh criticism of what they say. This seems an utterly half-baked position. If academics are to be prepared to take student comment seriously, as they should be, they should extend to students the treatment they are happy to extend to their colleagues, of pointing out that something is idiotic, if idiotic is what it is.
I do not include among qualifications to projects of reform in this area, that students should discuss and not dictate, and that this is not a matter of student power. This seems to me, not a qualification to reform, but an absolutely necessary and limiting condition of it; and academics should regard this point as strictly non-negotiable, as they should regard the question of the appointment of university teachers. There are two reasons for this, both excessively and unsurprisingly well-known. One is the ‘boot-straps’ problem. It is straightforwardly a functional and relevant difference between junior and senior members that the latter know more about something, and are there to teach it to the former; and whatever advantages the junior members may or may not possess over the senior in moral enthusiasm or purity of heart, that difference is not cancelled out.
The second point is one that is usually put in terms of academic freedom: that academics should be free to teach their subjects as they see fit, free from pressures, particularly ideological pressures, from governments, churches, big business, populist movements—or mass meetings of students. This is indeed a fair way of putting it. But one may also put it in terms, not so much of freedom, as of integrity. Some very radical opinion seems sometimes to suggest that a teacher is morally at fault if he is unresponsive to demands that he should teach some particular kinds of material. Admittedly, he is at fault, and in very old-fashioned academic terms, if through narrow-mindedness he remains obstinately ignorant of important and serious developments. But, beyond that point, suppose he seriously thinks that the material is not so important as all that? Or what he is doing is more important? Or merely that, while the material may be interesting, he is not the man to do it justice, or that to do it justice would take him too much away from matters to which he thinks he has something to contribute? In short, what if he does not believe in it, or does not believe in it for him? Will it be a mark of virtue to give up what he does believe in, in order to put on some fashionable or well-regarded act of pursuing what he does not believe in? I should have thought that those who regard integrity as a cardinal virtue, and phoniness as a cardinal vice, would recognise to which category that performance would belong.
This last point is important, I think, even if we get away for a moment from the high ground of ultimate principle, and consider once more the area of desirable and possible reform. It is a very important limitation on proposals for syllabus reform in a given department, not only what the staff of that department can competently do, but what they can do genuinely. To take for a moment my own subject, which notably, though by no means uniquely, raises these problems: it would be an excellent idea for a philosophy department to provide, if it could, classes on certain thinkers not widely studied in this country, such as Nietzsche. But if, as things are, there is no one in the department who really cares about Nietzsche, to whom he means very much, it will be pointless to try to make them do it: a course on Nietzsche which is worth having cannot just be ‘laid on’. Nietzsche is to some extent a special case, but the same point applies more generally, and particularly to the sorts of subjects for which there is at present a lot of demand. Of course, this means that there is some reason, if further appointments are being made, to look out for someone who is good and can genuinely and at a serious level meet these wider demands; but, there again, one has (obviously enough) to watch that one is not preferring the fashionable to the creative, nor succumbing to the danger of producing, as in some American universities for instance, an anthology of points of view rather than a set of people who can actually do something together. ‘Non omnia possumus omnes’ is a maxim which applies to departments as well as to persons.
Perhaps a professor of philosophy is likely to be particularly conscious, among demands presently made on the syllabus, of what are, in the broadest sense, ideological demands. But it is important that there also exist demands, not least among students, that courses should be ‘relevant’ in a rather different sense: that they should be more relevant to what people are going to do after university—at the limit, that they should be more vocational. Some recent student demands give the impression that they embrace both these aspects of ‘relevance’ to the point of contradiction: on the one hand rejecting a university which allegedly churns out trained personnel on an assembly line in response to the needs of a mechanical society, on the other hand demanding that university courses do more to fit people into slots in society than they do at the moment.
There is indeed a kind of revolutionary outlook which would claim to overcome this contradiction, by seeking to change society in such a radical way that its slots (if it still had slots) would be filled precisely by people who had had a politicised, non-technical and unstructured experience in a radically changed university. I think in fact that this dream, besides its evident unrealism and the absurd picture it presents of the future of creative thought, contains a contradiction on the matter it cares most about—the avoidance of the mechanical. The contradiction, excessively briefly put, is this. Unless the theory belongs to the long series of agrarian fantasies—as Marxists used to say, utopian and reactionary fantasies—which have been a feature of much British socialist thought, it looks to a time when technology has not been abandoned, but rather has triumphed, and the labour of men has systematically been replaced by the operations of sophisticated machines. But either these machines are looked after and programmed by people, or they look after themselves. If they are run by a small number of people, not only will those people be technologically educated, but they will be the ultimate élite, the rulers of the world: contrary, surely, to the dream. But if the machines run themselves, then it will be machines which, in innumerable important respects, determine the living space of humans, and the machines, in effect, will rule the world: also, surely, contrary to the dream. One thing we can be fairly clear about, even with regard to these remoter prospects, is that if sophisticated machines are to replace a lot of labour we shall need a lot of people to be their masters, and a lot more people who will be at least their match; and that will require people who will be able to think technically about machines, and in a disciplined way about society. To abandon the more disciplined and rigorous intellectual activities on a large scale for more purely expressive and unstructured enterprises in education would be to prepare, not the liberated beneficiaries of that future society, but its certain victims.
If all this is to peer dimly into hypothetical futures, it is not wholly irrelevant to present discontents. In any case, no dream, even a better dream than that one, is going to get round the present conflict between demands for less vocationally functional, and for more vocationally functional, education. It is of course easier to point out the conflict, and to pinpoint some contradictions in student demands, than it is to respond adequately to the real frustrations that underlie them. But whatever thoughts we may arrive at about the relation of university courses to what students will later do (and a lot needs to be said here about the role of postgraduate courses, for instance), we certainly need to get the immediate diagnosis right about who, if anybody, is imposing what sort of pattern on whom. It is important to see that, in terms of what is actually happening now in this country, the universities are demonstrably not having imposed upon them demands of government or industry with regard to the needs for technically trained man-power. On the contrary, the agencies which bear most directly on universities, the DES [Department of Science] and the UGC [University Grants Committee], are busily engaged in that old liberal activity, of providing the means for people to realise their individual choices. Many committees, some headed by prominent academics, have shown that the country has an unsatisfied need for technologists and scientists, and tried to persuade universities to reflect this need; and in the late 50’s the UGC intended some two-thirds of new places in universities to be devoted to these subjects. As is also well-known, the proportion of potential students demanding those subjects first ceased to rise, and then fell; and, instead of trying to devise means by which screws could be put on universities or students to force people in the required direction, ‘society’—that is to say, in this case principally the UGC—heavily revised its allocations in the direction of providing more places in the humanities and social sciences. Much the same goes for the policies of the DES and local authorities towards Colleges of Further Education; when I visited a very prominent and expanding College of Technology a few weeks ago, I learned (with some surprise) that less than half of its students were doing technology or science. These developments seem to me important for an honest evaluation, both of revolutionary rhetoric about universities being the tools of a technological society, and also—as the Vice-Chancellor of Cambridge forcefully pointed out in his lecture in this series last year—of petulant and ill-informed complaints by some academics about inroads from these agencies into academic freedom.
There is a strong tendency in the most radical quarters, at least, to regard facts of this order as beside the point, and as at best expressions of a kind of a liberalism which happily puts up with, indeed (on the most radical view) actively fosters, the evils which political protest is directed against. This sort of critique borrows a lot from recent American experience, and radical American students are, not surprisingly, among the most prominent in certain universities here in pressing this sort of line. It would be absurd for me to embark here on a discussion of the failure of liberalism, if that is what it is, in American society, or of the extent to which basic problems of theirs are or are not paralleled here. Nor shall I try any serious evaluation of American academic troubles, such as the complex events at Columbia; that would itself be a very long job, even if I were capable of it. I think it is worth pointing out, however, certain differences in the university situation which for the most part obtains here, and that which has been the focus of criticism and protest in certain places in the United States; whatever one thinks of certain actions that have been taken there, what is certainly just false is the assumption that there is something called the ‘late capitalist university’ whose relations to society and to its students are the same in both countries.
There are several important points of difference. First, in the case of those prominent centres of university trouble in the United States, Berkeley and Columbia, there have been four sets of people involved: the trustees (or regents), the administration, the faculty, and the students, and the relations between all these four parties have caused difficulties—the regents (in the case of Berkeley) having political interests even against the administration, the administration taking decisions without concurrence of the faculty, and the faculty being—it is alleged—too remote from the students. This kind of set-up is not in general paralleled in this country, though one or two institutions may get rather nearer to it than the others. Correspondingly, if one takes the faculty and the students together, there is less ground for the feeling that their joint academic interests are being operated on from outside; and if one considers the relations between the faculty and the students, the claim that students are neglected or merely processed has less to feed on. Both points come out, if one remembers what—besides the money, the secretarial help, and the research apparatus—are the two great bribes extended to potential brain-drainers: that they will not have to teach, and that they will not have to administer. Of course American academics themselves do a great deal of teaching—more, for the most part, than the prestige British import who has been offered this inducement; but certainly they have handed over more in the way of administration than we have, and with it (some seem suddenly to have realised) control over what happens in their own institutions.
Another very important area of difference lies in the relations to money—both private money and defence money. There is nothing evil about private and industrial money in universities, and there is a lot of reason to be grateful for it, so long as the conventions that govern it keep it under control. But it is my impression that in certain American universities the trustees and administrators find themselves so deeply entangled in commercial and financial connections that freedom is lost. If one studies some of these situations, one may well feel that our arrangements for public money, so long at least as they are administered in the derided spirit of liberalism, can confer a greater degree of genuine independence than do these other arrangements, which are sometimes supposed to give greater freedom. The public money must, however, be in large part money devoted by society precisely to the purposes of education, and what it cannot be, in particular, is money devoted to defence. The lines between research devoted to military purposes, relevant to military purposes, and having nothing to do with military purposes, are famously difficult to draw; but the minimum principle, crude as it is, that universities should contain no classified research, seems to me of absolutely basic importance. This principle may seem to some to smell of the attitudes of Pontius Pilate, since (it may be said) the classified research goes on somewhere else, and one is merely squeamishly spared the embarrassment of having it on the premises. But, in any case, the principle that such research should not go on in universities is independent of whether one disapproves of classified research or not: even someone who approves of it will see the point that the distortions in the academic body set up by having it in universities are dangerous, and also that it is desirable that people should make it clear, by where they work, what their relations to it are. And if one does disapprove of it, or some of it, it is not hypocrisy to wish it to happen, if at all, somewhere else. One cannot eliminate everything one disapproves of from society, but one can do the best one can to see that those things are not done by bodies of which one is oneself a part, and for whose doings one is in some part directly responsible. The involvement of some American universities in defence contracts seems to me to have been a legitimate ground of protest.
I am not trying to say that American universities have been in all sorts of ways wicked, and we are marvellous. My point can be put merely by saying that even if there were equal grounds of protest in both places, they certainly could not be just the same, since factors which have figured very prominently in American protest are evidently different here. If those grounds are just transported across the Atlantic in a can, like a Hollywood film, and run here, it looks, to that extent, like another example of cultural imperialism.
So far I have spoken in large part about the grounds that protest may have in relation to a university, and about how those grounds may be, in certain areas I have singled out from many, met by reform. I should now like to look more closely at the activity of protesting in a university, and the relations of that activity to ideas of revolution—relations which are rather more complex and interesting than may appear on the surface. I think we can understand more or less what we mean by ‘a student protest’: they range from something slightly stronger and more irregular than merely sending a round robin to the Dean, and have many degrees of escalation up to sit-ins, strikes (a very ineffective weapon for students, incidentally), occupation of buildings and at the limit violence and destruction. They can be concerned, as I said at the beginning, with two different sorts of things: issues about the university itself, and wider political issues.
Now whatever one thinks of protests in general, one thing I think is clear is that one has to attach a special significance, from the point of view of a university, to continuous protests; and this applies to both types. So far as what we may call academic protests are concerned, it would be dishonest to deny that they do on occasion work, and produce some results that would not have been achieved, or so quickly, by the old channels of communication. The point about speed is of course particularly significant for students, who are not going to be there all that long, and may well have gone altogether by the time the unhurried processes of academic deliberation have dealt with the issue; even teachers can take this point, particularly when confronted with the kind of senior figure who always says, at the prospect of some reform, “it will come”, as though that relieved everyone of bringing it about that it come. But, if, by the very fact of being students with a short career, students have an interest in the speed that protest can occasionally secure, it is also true, and by the very same fact, that they have an interest in protest not being continuous. Protest being by definition to some extent disruptive, the price they pay for continuous disruption during their university career must be, by the same argument, proportionately high. If some protest shifts a blocked system, and in particular encourages reforms which themselves may make protest less necessary to get later reforms, continuous protests designed to get reforms must be progressively self-defeating. So, granted at least that some results have been achieved, continuous protests will, if they have any rationale at all, probably have to have a rationale which is not primarily concerned with securing reforms, but with something else.
A similar point can be made with regard to political protest, but in slightly different terms. It might be said that in this case continuous protest had a much better justification, since, first, it is much less likely to have produced any results, and, second, the subject will be of greater national or world importance, indeed of greater moral importance, than arrangements in a university. These two points are true, but they do not make the case. The war in Vietnam, world hunger, the bomb, are issues vastly more important than anything I or any student will do; but it doesn’t follow from that that protesting about these issues is more important than anything else I or he can do. If one is overwhelmed by the appalling feeling that what one is fiddling around with is completely dwarfed by such issues, one might think, as a few do, in terms of a more adequate individual response, such as working in famine relief or serving in some capacity in Vietnam. Few make such a response, and there are very few of whom one would think it was positively demanded; for most of us, making a protest may have to serve as a symbolic substitute, and it would seem to me quite frivolous and facile to say ‘no protest—either complete dedication, or shut up’. But what is equally frivolous and facile is to suppose, granted that one is sticking to symbolic protest, that the more one protests the nearer one approximates to the unrealised dedication. Either one feels that there are values and aims which can honourably be pursued despite the world’s sufferings, or one does not. If one does not, there is only dedication. If one does, then one has to realise that that is what one is doing, and not muck up those aims and values for oneself and others by confusing persistence in the symbolic with dedication to the actual.
If I am right so far, it just does not follow that if protest is occasionally a good thing, more protest must be a better thing; with both academic and political protest, continuous protest is by the very nature of the cases, a relevantly different thing, and not just more of the same. So for continuous protest, a rationale is demanded which goes beyond the justifications for occasional protest. What may it be? One, on the academic side, is if things are outrageously bad and no-one will move at all; another, on the political side, is if there is a real chance of actually securing a large change about the matters to which the protest is directed. I shall leave these, since I do not think that either of them is the case with virtually any situation which presently concerns us. There is another: that, on the academic side, of aiming at a change which is itself radical to a degree which no amount of mere reform could meet, and which the present authorities could not possibly grant. When I say that this would be a possible rationale of continuous protest, I do not mean that I agree with it: all I mean is that it is an objective in terms of which continuous protest might make sense, as it does not without some special objective. It looks, from reports, as though some student groups have such an objective with regard to the LSE [London School of Economics].
I myself think that the sort of institution which some members of the RSSF [Revolutionary Socialist Students’ Federation] seem to want would, if imaginable at all, be a nightmare, which would make impossible the things that have to be sustained in a university (such as finding out the truth), and would also rule out the sort of critical understanding of society which can support genuine programmes of social action. Although the principles involved in these points are of course of the first importance, I shall not go on about them; I want just to make the point that in any case the objective of trying by continuous protest to turn an institution such as the LSE into that sort of place is an absurd as well as a destructive objective.
It is absurd, because there is no conceivable mechanism by which such groups could inherit an institution such as the LSE. One cannot quite see the UGC, for instance, complacently supporting an LSE which, if that final day came, would have been deserted by its administration, most of its teachers, and large numbers of its students. This is obviously true anyway; and it must be at least as obviously true on the extremists’ own views of our society. If the aim is to have a certain sort of school—let us, just for the sake of a label and no more, call it a ‘revolutionary school’—the aim of making the LSE, a place with certain buildings, a library, resources, government support, and a body of teachers, into that school is a very unrealistic way of going about it. But I doubt in fact whether the aim is just to have a revolutionary school. This is based purely on a suspicion, but I think a well-founded suspicion, which is this. Suppose someone came up and actually offered to provide premises and resources for a revolutionary school (a proposal seriously advanced by a weekly paper some time ago): how many students or staff in the LSE or elsewhere who are in favour of such a school would go off to it? I suspect that many would not. If that suspicion is right, it seems to follow that the aim is not in fact just to get a revolutionary school. To work on an existing institution is not just regarded as the only available way of bringing about a revolutionary school: to work on an existing institution is probably essential to the project—presumably as being either symbolic or anticipatory of a wider revolutionary project.
‘Symbolic’ or ‘anticipatory’ is here a vital distinction, and just as vital to potential revolutionaries as to anyone else. With revolutions, as serious revolutionaries know, it makes a great deal of difference whether a revolution is actually likely to happen, and if so who is likely to win. There seems to me only one thing more certain than that a revolution is not going to happen in this country: and that is, that if it did, the Right would win. There are indeed suppressed political feelings in this country which are not adequately expressed in our politics; but they are very largely feelings which support more and not less authoritarian, chauvinistic and xenophobic measures. Nor can the fantasists of the revolutionary Left, with the slightest vestige of plausibility, embark on those age-old strategies of aiming first at Rightist power, and eventually, by politicization of the oppressed masses, to the revolution they want: that is not how it would be, either.
Disruption of universities as anticipatory of real revolution is a project patently insane. The activity has to be seen rather as symbolic; but how, and to what effect? I think I must leave the answer to ‘how’ to those who support these views; the questions of what this symbol is supposed to symbolise, and what its value is, seem to me questions well pressed on those who advocate these courses, by those who immediately have to suffer from them. But one can certainly give some answers to the question ‘with what effect?’: the effect, noted by very many students, that every less liberal attitude in the country gets aroused against students’ interests in general.
To choose a university, in any case, as the object of either symbolic or real revolution is basically pretty mad, as some speakers pointed out to students at Columbia; a lot of what it stands for is nearer to the ideals of the revolutionaries themselves than are other institutions. And to reply that the university is where one is, and is notably easier to deal with than those other institutions, is straightforwardly childish; it is on all fours with admitting that the reason one is nasty to one’s father is that, while he is actually a bit nicer than the people one really hates, he is the one who is at home and gets upset.
While real revolution is not on, and symbolic revolution has little obvious point and many counter-productive results, the confusion of the real and the symbolic from which some evidently suffer is disastrous from every point of view. It can breed, in particular, a special kind of moral confusion. It is a platitude that, confronted with a real revolutionary situation, certain constraints go to the wall: intimidating the unenthusiastic, breaking up the meetings of those on the other side, and so forth, begin to look not only permissible but imperative. But whatever one may do if the revolutionary situation is really there, to get to this point in the interests of a fantasy is totally destructive, and self-destructive. I believe that very few have got to this point, but the emotional power of the fantasy situation makes it possible. I said that to reach this point was self-destructive, and I mean that in two senses. First, by generating an atmosphere in which belonging to the cause alone counts, and disagreeable voices are made inaudible, the individual loses his own sense of self-criticism, ceases to listen to what he himself says, and loses his grasp on reality. Second, he destroys his own cause, and any like it; for (as I have already said) in anything like our situation, it is in the end the other side that can shout louder and kick harder. Letting people be heard is a good policy anyway, but it is a particularly good policy for minorities.
One last point. Rousseau said that he regarded as the best state, that in which the citizens spent as much time as possible in thinking about public matters, and as little as possible in thinking about private matters. It has always seemed to me a good test of certain basic political attitudes, whether one spontaneously finds that a sympathetic remark, or, as I do, a repulsive one. Either reaction, but particularly that second one, is going in fact to need qualification; one qualification (by no means the only or most important) is that one may have to turn aside from legitimate private activities for a bit if those very activities, and those of other persons, look like being jeopardised. Now I don’t in fact think that the activities of the most militant in universities have a very significant effect, as they would claim, in making people more concerned about genuine public issues of war and peace, hunger and oppression; what they do is to make the people around terribly concerned about universities, which is something else. Though that is a fairly private concern relative to those other problems, it is a public concern relative to one’s own work and teaching; and faced with real militancy, those who do not believe in it do have, for a time, to get actively moving in the public terrain. Those who just want to be able to do what they want to do, will certainly, in order to secure that, have to do a good deal of what they don’t want to do.
Has ‘God’ a Meaning?
People are often tempted to think of questions about meaning as though they were all on the level of the most trivial disagreements about the use of a particular word, the sort of disagreements that are rightly called ‘merely verbal’: exemplified, for instance, in the fact that Americans use the word ‘suspenders’ to refer to what we call ‘braces’. Obviously, no sane person would waste time arguing about which was the right word to use, or what the word ‘suspenders’ really meant. But most questions about meaning are not nearly as superficial as this, and in issues of metaphysics or religion we cannot proceed in this way.
Philosophers have become extremely conscious of the fact that it is possible to use language in an impressive and profound-seeming way, without what one says having any meaning at all, or at least—and this is an important point—without its having the sort of meaning that the speaker would like it to have.
Some speaker may think that he is making an important statement about the nature of the universe, or of history, or something, and it may turn out, when he is pressed, that no meaning has been given to his sayings which is determinate enough for him to be making any recognizable claim at all. In particular, this will be so if there is nothing definite to distinguish what is involved in this man’s claim from what would be involved in denying that claim. There has to be a difference between what things are like if it is true and what things are like if it isn’t. If there is really no difference between what things are like if a certain claim is true, and what they are like if it is not true, we can say that that claim has no content at all.
One very simple example, from the field of religious belief: and I should say at once that I don’t think that to criticize the sort of view I am going to mention is, in itself, to criticize any serious form of religious belief, since few serious religious believers would believe anything as simple as this. But there have been people who have thought that God’s purposes were positively manifested in natural disasters such as eruptions and earthquakes; for instance, by the punishment of wicked persons overwhelmed by these catastrophes. It is pointed out that the same catastrophes tend rather indiscriminately to involve also innocent persons, such as small children; or presumably virtuous persons, such as members of religious orders. The simple believer then replies that this manifests God’s purpose in another way, since it is good that the innocent and virtuous should go to Heaven.
He is then asked, presumably, why other innocent and virtuous persons are not given this benefit to go to Heaven quickly, but left to suffer on earth to a hearty old age; and many of the wicked, indeed, seem to do quite well and are not despatched. Something is then said to the effect that it is also good that the virtuous should have life on earth, and that the punishment of the wicked be delayed for a while, and so on. And after all this we see that absolutely anything that happened to the virtuous, the wicked, or the in-between will count equally well; natural calamities directed by God turn out to be utterly indistinguishable in principle from natural calamities not directed by anyone; and the content of the claim that the happening of such incidents reveals any sort of Divine purpose dissolves in thin air.
As I said before, I don’t think the very naïve view I’ve just mentioned would be held by serious religious believers; in fact, I believe it would be condemned by them, as superstitious. The fact that this superstitious view turned out to be vacuous and have no content would be held by many sceptical philosophers to be the case, in a more sophisticated way, as regards the central tenets of a religion such as Christianity. One form of this more general sort of philosophical criticism was advanced by the ‘logical positivists’.
Logical positivism started in the early years of this century, and was developed principally in Vienna in the ’twenties. It became known in this country through a very remarkable book by Professor A. J. Ayer, called Language, Truth, and Logic, which was published in 1936. The positivists held that there were only two sorts of statements that genuinely have meaning. One sort were statements which were true merely because of the definitions of the terms used in them: a boring example is ‘all bachelors are unmarried’. These need not bother us. The other sort of meaningful statement consisted of those that could be shown to be true or shown to be false by some possible sense-experience: for instance, by some possible scientific experiment or observation. All other remarks not of these two types were considered by the positivists to be meaningless. This doctrine obviously dealt pretty hard with statements of religion, which certainly don’t seem to be typically verifiable by science.
Many philosophers now would agree that a principal criticism of logical positivism was the very narrow view it took of something’s being meaningful. It is obviously wrong just to lump together as meaningless everything that fails the positivist test; pieces of poetry, commands, expressions of wishes, and lots of other pieces of ordinary meaningful language fail the test and yet have meaning. The positivist challenge has helped to make philosophers more conscious of different sorts of meaning. While this is so, I do not think that the positivist position, in an essential respect, is just to be dismissed. For even if it overlooked a lot of kinds of meaning, it seems to me at least roughly right about one central sort of meaning: the sort of meaning which belongs to statements which one can claim to be true or false. This point can be made in terms of belief: that to believe is to believe something, and if there is anything that one believes, one ought to be able to say in some way—if not in the very narrow terms of sense-experience—what the difference is between what one believes being true and what one believes not being true. In the case of religious statements, in particular statements about God, the important question, to my mind, is not whether they have a meaning, or no meaning: the important question is, what sort of meaning they have.
And this is a question which affects whether one wants to go on making such statements or not.
There is no doubt that some people at some times have given a meaning to the statement that God exists, and to other statements about God, which came very near to making those statements into a sort of supplement to science: God came in where science left off. This is the God which the Bishop of Woolwich called in his book Honest to God ‘the God of the gaps’—the gaps, that is to say, in science. Taken in this way, statements about God were certainly not empty or vacuous in the sort of way I have been talking about before. They made a fairly definite claim: that certain phenomena, such as the adaptation of animals to their environment, or, again, the existence of living things, did not admit of a scientific explanation. These negative claims that certain sorts of scientific explanation were impossible were certainly not empty; the trouble was that they have turned out to be false, since such scientific explanations are forthcoming and there is every sign that they will go on being forthcoming. So if that was the sort of thing meant by religious statements, if that was the sort of meaning they had, they would have to be written off as a hopeful bet against science, which science won.
At this point, some modern theologian may come along, and say something like this: ‘I agree that the attempts to make God fill in holes in science is hopeless: the existence of God is not a hypothesis, supplementary to science, and never should have been regarded as such.’ I also think the theologian may justly add that these sorts of arguments do a disservice to religion by making God into an abstract or scientific object, instead of something of living concern to people. ‘Christianity is about people caring; it essentially involves taking a serious attitude to the world, to personal relationships, to society. When someone says he is a Christian, and that he believes in God, it is such an attitude that he declares. His statements of his religion are not meaningless: they have just this meaning, that the speaker declares such an attitude to life.’
This modern theologian I have made up is at best a composite figure; he is probably a caricature. But the tone is familiar. And my reply to him is this. ‘If that is what Christian remarks mean, and only that, then people should stop making them. The Christian vocabulary is unnecessary; if you want to say “I care about personal relationships”, we have a very good English sentence for saying that, which does not mention God—namely the sentence, “I care about personal relationships”. What is worse, the Christian vocabulary is, for the purpose you give it, actively misleading. For it is quite obvious that historically the claims of Christianity have not just been ways of expressing certain attitudes to the world and to other people: they have been taken to be, if true, very important truths which give reasons for having those attitudes towards personal relationships and so on. To represent the words of Christianity as merely expressing these essentially secular attitudes is in fact to have given the thing up, while retaining the vocabulary.’
It may be objected that I am engaged in the old sceptics’ game of insisting that Christianity be represented in the most conservative and implausible forms so that I go on disbelieving it. I hope that that is not what I am doing. What I am rather trying to do is to insist that if Christianity is to be Christianity at all there has to be something to be believed or disbelieved, and that this has to be something over and above a mere belief about the secular order.
Christianity is a religion which is very historically articulate; one knows a good deal about what has been believed at different stages of its development. It is also a religion which is tied to certain texts, in particular, of course, the Bible and of course to a particular figure, Christ, about whom one is told something in those texts. Given this, it seems to me possible to identify certain beliefs which must be held if it is Christianity that is being believed at all. I will suggest just one—very unambitiously and, one would hope, platitudinously. This is that God is transcendent to human affairs and to human attitudes in a sense which has the following consequence (though it is supposed to mean more as well): that God would exist whether human beings and their attitudes existed or not—even if there were no human beings or human aspirations, there would still be a God.
To believe this is certainly not enough to constitute one’s being a Christian, as I understand it. A Christian has, for instance, to go on to say something very special about Christ (and not just that Christ was a better moral teacher than Socrates). But I shall leave the rest, and concentrate on this one point: that to believe what I just very roughly spelled out is at least necessary to having Christian beliefs. And I think it is worth asking oneself very carefully when confronted with some reinterpretation of Christian doctrine whether it passes this test: that it represents God as a being who would be there even if no human beings, or indeed other finite conscious beings, were there. If it does not, then I suspect you no longer have any form of Christianity, but probably some form of religious Humanism.
All this is still about meaning. I said the problem was about what Christian and other religious statements are said to mean. There is a limit to what they can be made to mean; when their meaning has changed too much, in particular when it is identified too closely with a meaning which refers only to human life, there is no point in going on making them in the religious form. Sometimes of course—perhaps one must say, very often—it is not at all easy to discover whether this has happened or not: clouds of ambiguity stand in the way. In this connection I think we should look extremely closely at a famous passage from Paul Tillich’s The Shaking of the Foundations (pp 63 f) quoted in Honest to God, which seems to suggest that to deny that God exists is to deny that life has depth. Tillich wrote: ‘The Name of this infinite and inexhaustible depth and ground of all being is God. That depth is what the word God means. And if that word has not much meaning for you, translate it, and speak of the depths of your life, of the source of your being, of your ultimate concern, of what you take seriously without any reservation. Perhaps, in order to do so, you must forget everything traditional that you have learned about God, perhaps even the word itself. For if you know that God means depth, you know much about him. You cannot then call yourself an atheist or unbeliever, for you cannot think or say: Life has not depth. Life is shallow. Being itself is surface only. If you could say this in complete seriousness, you would be an atheist; but otherwise you are not. He who knows about depth knows about God.’ This raises many questions. In the sense in which ‘life has depth’ is a statement which only superficial people are going to reject—can it really be enough to represent what ‘God exists’ is supposed to mean? When people said that God exists were they really saying just that life has depth?
Is Tillich really saying that believing in God is just the same as not being superficial? If not, what more? What sort of thing does his pervasive phrase, ‘the ground of our being’, mean? Is the ‘ground of our being’ something that would be there even if we were not? Or is the ‘ground of our being’ something more like our deepest aspirations, which presumably would not be there if we were not?
I do not think that ‘God’, or statements containing that word, have no meaning. I think they can have all sorts of meanings. On some, they are very difficult to interpret indeed. On others, they seem to me to make claims which can be at least well enough identified to be seen to be substantial; in those meanings, which are various, the claims seem to me personally, I must say, to be false. But at least there is something to be false, and something to be disbelieved. In yet other meanings that are given to them, they say nothing, or too little, or something of the wrong sort—representing, for instance, merely some human aspiration. Then there is nothing to be false, nothing to disbelieve. But when that is so, there is nothing to be true, nothing to believe, either.
Russell and Moore: The Analytical Heritage, by A. J. Ayer
In the annals of twentieth-century philosophy, the early alliance of Bertrand Russell and G. E. Moore is famous, as the principal contribution to the undermining of the temporary and untypical influence of Idealism on British thought. Moore, at that time, influenced Russell; at various times Russell’s work provided Moore, who was always disposed to start from other philosophers’ sayings, with material to criticise. They each greatly influenced analytical philosophy. But they were very different philosophers, with extremely different temperaments and types of achievement. Ayer indeed treats them separately in this book (which is derived from his William James lectures at Harvard), dealing first with Russell and then with Moore.1
Bloomsbury, famously, favoured Moore, mainly (it seems) because of the intensity and purity of his personality, and on the strength of ‘Principia Ethica,’ which found intrinsic good notably in aesthetic experience and personal relations; Russell it seems to have regarded with the same suspicion as Keynes—he gave signs of being busy, worldly and liable to contribute to some positive science. Ayer’s book, however, does not deal with any of that: it sticks sternly to the philosophers’ arguments on logical questions and topics in the theory of knowledge, intellectual and cultural history left firmly on one side.
It does, however, deal with the more recent and professional reasons for favouring Moore, which have had some currency among British philosophers. This attitude has insisted that Russell, for all his great achievements in logic and the foundations of mathematics, is both a more traditional and a more slapdash philosopher than Moore: more traditional, because he took the brisk advancing of theories, sometimes surprising, to be philosophy’s business, while Moore saw that there was a problem about both the nature and the extent of the philosopher’s power to refute common-sense; more slapdash because he lacked Moore’s intense kind of unflashy seriousness in trying to say exactly what he meant. Russell, it has been said, looks back to Hume; Moore looks forward or sideways to Wittgenstein and J. L. Austin.
Ayer, who is sympathetic to both his subjects, but more (it is fairly evident) to Russell, has some interesting things to say in criticism of this by now familiar view. In particular, he shows how little is defended by Moore’s celebrated ‘defence of common-sense’—a good deal less than is often ascribed to it by some subsequent enthusiasts for ‘ordinary language.’ Moore thought that while there were various beliefs of common-sense, disputed by philosophers, which were certainly true, the question of the analysis of those beliefs—what they really involved and meant—was almost entirely open; and as Ayer reminds us, he was prepared to entertain some peculiar and indeed theory-laden suppositions about what their analysis might involve.
I think that there are also some questions to be raised about Moore’s famous care and precision, to which virtues he raised an ugly monument in his grinding style, which reads often like some legal document. This style assists sometimes the appearance rather than the reality of precision, and is capable of conveying a kind of emphatic vagueness which curiously co-exists with the marks of solicitor-like caution. Moore’s definition of ‘x in this usage is an incomplete symbol,’ which Ayer quotes, provides a rich example:
In the case of every sentence, p, in which x occurs with this meaning, there can be formed another sentence, q, for which p is short, such that neither x itself nor any expression for which x is short occurs in q, and p always looks as if the rest of it expressed a propositional function, such that the proposition expressed by p is a value of that function, whereas in fact it never does.
Such a sentence in fact just does not have the virtues which could alone compensate for its vices.
Ayer does not range very widely beyond the exposition and criticism of particular arguments and positions of the two philosophers, and there are points at which the book tends to sink a bit discouragingly between two stools, where the treatment is too analytical to give much historical insight, but the philosophical rewards are too slight to make the discussion of the Russellian or Moorean topic worthwhile in its own right. But this is only at points; he has organised and set out with great lucidity and skill a great deal of material, and puts us in control of the philosophers’ arguments. If not all the arguments are equally fascinating, it is not Ayer’s fault for reminding us that both these men worked their way in their time over some peculiarly unfruitful territory.
Note
1. Russell and Moore: The Analytical Heritage, by A. J. Ayer (Macmillan, 1971).
Immanuel Kant, by Lucien Goldmann
Lucien Goldmann is best known in Britain for his study of Pascal and Racine (Le Dieu Caché, 1955; translated as The Hidden God, 1964). He died in 1970; he has been commemorated in Cambridge by the Memorial Lecture which Raymond Williams gave last year. This book1 is a translation of Goldmann’s first book, his doctoral thesis at Zürich, which was published there under the title Mensch, Gemeinschaft und Welt in der Philosophie Immanuel Kants. A French translation was first published in 1948, followed by a second French edition in 1967, with the rather less informative title Introduction à la philosophie de Kant.
When Goldmann wrote this book he was very much under the influence of Lukács, an influence which indeed continued, but which he came to put into a longer perspective; thus even in the introduction to the 1948 translation he modifies the extravagance which in the first version placed Lukács alone of twentieth-century philosophers alongside Hegel and Marx. The book constitutes a ‘humanistic’-Marxist interpretation of Kant, and in both respects it is unusual. It is unusual among interpretations available to English readers in being Marxist and it is unusual among Marxist interpretations in being genuinely devoted to Kant, both in the sense of being actually, if eccentrically, about him, and also in the sense of saluting him and his thought as a recognition at the deepest level of humane values which (in Goldmann’s view) were later to be more fully and adequately expressed by Marx. Goldmann denies the aim of writing a work of Kantian scholarship, seeking rather to produce a work of philosophy, yet in fact there is a good deal of reference to and exposition of the Kantian texts, and the book even has the overall structure of an expository outline, starting with an historical background chapter (of a sort), and proceeding via the theory of knowledge and ethics to political and religious doctrines.
The key concept for Goldmann in Kant’s thought is totality, a concept associated intimately with that of community. Goldmann’s thesis is that Kant, both in his theory of knowledge and in his ethics, shows himself sensitive to the limitations and ultimate emptiness of ‘bourgeois’ and individualist conceptions, and strives towards a conception of a human community which will indeed be based on reason, but which will transcend the limitations of these atomistic conceptions. However, owing to the limitations of his time and place—the particular limitations of late 18th century Prussian intellectual life play an important role, both negatively and positively, in Goldmann’s account—he could not conceive of such a community, as later it was to be conceived by Marx and (very imperfectly indeed) by Hegel, as lying in the future; he conceives it rather as lying in the region of the ideal, and the role which should be played by the philosophy of history is still, in Kant’s thought, played by the philosophy of religion. As Goldmann puts it: ‘In the critical philosophy, where man’s limitation and the problem of his destiny predominate, only secondary importance is ultimately accorded to the philosophy of history; there is only a present, duty, and an eternity, religion, but no future, no history; this is the clearest expression of that ultimate limit beyond which, despite all his efforts, Kant was never able to pass.’
To some extent, Goldmann brings his account into relation to humane values as they can be perceived outside Marxism, and this not only makes him more sympathetic, in all senses, than many Marxist writers, but sustains some awareness of seemingly paradoxical elements in Marxism itself. Thus a constant theme, particularly among some American historians of ideas, has been the amount that many progressive or revolutionary philosophies have had in common with chiliastic and religious outlooks of the past: an observation deployed usually in a reductive spirit, and often justly so. But someone wishing to use that implement against Goldmann will need a firmer hold on it, since he clearly recognizes that to regard Kant’s religious and moral aspirations as prefiguring Marxist revolutionary hopes is equally to see those hopes as expressing something in common with religious aspirations: the critic’s observation is accepted, and the critic is seen as, too often, merely having begged the question about which way round it is to be used.
Goldmann is, in this work, exceedingly unabashed about the extent of historical aspirations. He quotes Heine: ‘Wir wollen hier auf Erden schon das Himmelreich errichten’ and adds that he ‘thus expressed the essential content of modern humanism’. The statement is surprising enough. It remains surprising, even when two points have been allowed for: first, that the statement is in some part definitional of what Goldmann means by ‘humanism’, and second, that the ‘essential content’ relates to a hope, not to a prediction, so that part of humanism may be, as Goldmann claims it is in Kant, and was later to find it in Pascal and Racine, a tragic vision, which combines a belief in the pointfulness of human effort—and hence (Goldmann claims) at least not a certainty that it will be unsuccessful—with a deep lack of certainty that it will or could be successful. Goldmann is exciting and suggestive on a tragic element in Kant’s philosophy, and I shall come back to that.
His own explanation of it, however, is intricately involved in his Marxist structure; for he has to explain why the aspirations after a human community take this tragic form in Kant, and this turns out to be connected with the social situation of the German bourgeoisie in that period. He has to go further, since even if that type of explanation could make a dent on the questions concerning the moral philosophy, it would seem conspicuously to underdetermine Kant’s theory of knowledge. He does go further; and while one gets the impression that the application of specifically Marxist categories to the Critique of Pure Reason is a bit episodic, it is not exactly half-hearted, and although Goldmann’s outlook (so far as I can see) is flexible enough to leave room for a good deal of internalist or non-ideological explanation of a philosophical work, he has not here systematically made use of it. The result is an irritating mixture of extreme vagueness on general points, and a reckless disregard of historical truth on a lot of particular ones; and it is a pity, since a reader may be put off by all that before he gets to some excellent insights.
Some of the more knock-about treatment of the history of philosophy is not so much connected with any specifically Marxist approach, but is rather a general feature of certain European philosophical styles, of the kind amusingly if cantankerously castigated by J.-F. Revel in his Pourquoi des Philosophes? and elsewhere. Like the 18th century Paris orchestra, so the 20th century Paris philosopher must start with a coup d’archet, and a fortissimo burst of surprising assertion takes one’s breath away in the first chapter. ‘All the great German philosophical systems start out from the problem of morals, from the “practical”, a problem virtually unknown to French philosophers before Bergson’ (p. 41). What about Rousseau, on the one side, or Leibniz on the other? Well, Rousseau is never mentioned at all, which is quite remarkable in a work covering this ground; as for Leibniz, it is claimed that ‘the problem of morals already occupies a preponderant place’ (p. 42), which is a bit weaker than the claim made on the page before, but is still quite untrue. Yet more remarkable is the explanation of why Germany, as opposed to France, has so few comic and satirical writers: ‘… one can only laugh at that which is already virtually overcome and brought down; one laughs when the future is open, when one has the whole people behind one. That is why laughing has become almost a national virtue in France’ (p. 45).
One might, I suppose, charitably take it that this kind of remark in this genre of work does not actually aim at truth at all, and that it is an error of literary judgement to suppose that it does. What is said in cafés in Paris is not, in point of seriousness, so unlike what is said in saloon bars in London—it is merely that in Paris there is a greater disposition to print it. But this principle of interpretation cannot be extended too widely, and a point soon comes where the distinctive Marxist thesis of the book has to be called in question.
In general, the Marxist treatment of Kant’s theory of knowledge which Goldmann offers depends on a kind of analogical thinking which is exceedingly mysterious in its backing, and hence, often, in its content. He claims that Kant in his analysis of the limitations on human knowledge ‘lays the philosophical foundations for a most penetrating critique of bourgeois individualist society’ and that ‘this critique of the thought and action of individualist man is to be found in the Aesthetic of the Critique of Pure Reason and the two Analytics of the Critique of Pure Reason and the Critique of Practical Reason’ (p. 110).
These claims seem to be based on, and to offer, no more than a loose structural or symbolic analogy between certain features which supposedly obtained in Prussian society, and certain features of the Kantian philosophy, as for instance its insistence on the notion of the ‘synthesis of a totality’ being ‘set as a task’. That Kant himself saw his enterprise in quite a different light, and precisely and emphatically claimed that his results obtained for humanity as such, is of course admitted, but dismissed as a familiar kind of limitation. A few remarks about the sociology of knowledge do nothing to make these procedures less arbitrary.
This is of course excessively familiar ground. But in reading Goldmann, I am struck forcibly by something which can strike one also in the pages of phenomenologists, or, again, of Lévi-Strauss: the degree to which this is essentially magical thought, the primitive conception that similarities must point to powers, and analogies in thought stand for a kind of causation. As magical, it is also at a deep level comforting: and in more than the way in which Goldmann, very frankly and explicitly, makes it a demand on a philosophy that it should hold out hope for the future. (The element of comfort makes this kind of philosophical thought a weak candidate, in the long run, for radical critics of analytical philosophy to run as an alternative, since in that contrast the bleak elements of analytical philosophy must appear as witness to its being more honest and more grown-up: while in other connexions, that is not all that is to be said about its bleakness.)
Goldmann in fact, at a more particular level, has some difficulty in stopping the supposed Marxist explanations from collapsing into something too indistinct to be of any use to him. Thus one application he makes of Lukács’ concept of reification (a very close relative of alienation) is to thought which radically separates a priori judgements from the empirically given; and this reification is closely associated with ‘the modern bourgeois individualist order’ (p. 127), an association filled out by references to the stock-market, the prices of commodities, etc. This seems to face the difficulty that perhaps the most notable example of this type of thought in the history of philosophy was Plato, who was not modern, nor bourgeois, nor confronted with a stock-market. Later on (p. 150–1) the possibility of reification seems indeed to be admitted to the rise of theoretical philosophy in ancient Greece—a rise itself associated, by a familiar Marxist tack, with Ionian trade patterns. So now ‘modern’ and ‘bourgeois’ seem to have given way to a more generous category, of persons engaged in trade; and in terms merely of Marxist theory itself, the question arises whether the association of these patterns of thought with the bourgeois stage of development was not a mistake, and the association should be, much more basically, with the division of labour. But if that, then much of the distinctive thesis of this book evaporates. Moreover, since these associations are anyway made in the most abstract terms, one might ask whether the ‘conditions of production’ with which these patterns of thought are to be associated may not turn out to be the conditions of any production whatsoever, in which case one will be rapidly returning to the original Kantian claim, that his theories were valid for humanity as such. Many different views, in principle, might be possible along this route: Goldmann does not in fact provide us with the materials to make anything determinate out of any of them.
Much of the theoretical material of this book is at best empty. But in among the theoretical materials there are certainly living and interesting things. One question in particular about Kant gains illumination from what Goldmann says, even though he does not directly approach it: why is it that Kant, who emphasizes over and over again that his theory of knowledge applies only to creatures who, like men, learn about the world through sense-perception, offers on the other hand a moral philosophy which purports to apply to any rational creature as such? Why not the same restriction for both theory and practice? The answer to this question leads into the heart of Kant’s views about freedom and rational agents as ends; Goldmann offers interesting thoughts in this area. Again, he brings out in particularly striking ways the difference between Kantian and utilitarian thought, and equally the divergence between Kantian enlightenment and general 18th century views about progress. Above all, he convincingly brings out, as I mentioned before, a tragic aspect to Kant’s thought, embodied particularly in the aspiration to a rational ethical world. Kant said: act as if the maxim of your action were to become through your will a universal law of nature. Goldmann writes: ‘ “As if through your will”—in those five words Kant expresses in the clearest and most precise manner the grandeur and the tragedy of human existence. “Through your will” expresses the grandeur of man … “As if”—that is the tragic limitation, for nothing essential in the external world really depends on this individual action. It will not change the world, still less other men …’.
One of the sourest discords between what Goldmann finds here in Kant’s idealism, and the Marxist onward march in terms of which he interprets it, lies in the consideration that in practice few movements in history can have been less disposed to ‘futile’ or ‘Utopian’ Kantian gestures than Marxist movements have been.
Note
1. Immanuel Kant, by Lucien Goldmann (New Left Books, 1971).
A Theory of Justice, by John Rawls
“Justice is the first virtue of social institutions, as truth is of systems of thought,” Rawls writes at the beginning of this most remarkable book.1 The sentence contains the seeds of a lot that is to follow. A social system may have many other properties that we can recognise as advantages—as that many people are content or getting what they want, or that a class of outstanding artists is supported—but without justice it is not acceptable. There are many social values, but they can be ordered: and justice comes first. Justice itself, moreover, is various: both in the sense that there can be various conceptions of justice, several of which Rawls very carefully explores, and also in the sense that the conception of justice which he favours, which he calls ‘justice as fairness,’ itself embraces more than one principle, and these principles are themselves ordered, with a scale or precedence rationally determined between them.
I pick on this matter of the ordering of social principles first, because it is an outstanding feature of the kind of system that Rawls has produced, and also one which makes this very long and densely argued book, not merely a great achievement of intelligence and moral reflection, which it certainly is, but also notably heartening. It is heartening because it not only promises, but concretely presents, a systematic body of thought about the principles which should govern society, in a manner which manages to be at once complete and humane enough to satisfy moral demands, and rigorously unified enough to meet the rational requirements of one who wants more than disconnected insights. Up to now the main streams of reflective thought about social ends have tended, with the exception of Marxism, to flow into one of two channels. They have been in some cases pluralistic (the kind of outlook which Rawls, making an individual but very pointful use of a traditional term of moral philosophy, calls ‘intuitionist’): these believe that there is more than one independent social value, and that there can be no general and systematic way of ordering priorities between them—each case or type of case has to be viewed in itself, and some compromise contrived, between fairness and growth, for instance, or liberty and efficiency. To this the more rational and ordered alternative has seemed to be uniquely utilitarianism, which promises to reduce all social values to one: to some variant or another of the ‘greatest happiness of the greatest number.’ Since this aim is exceedingly obscure, both for empirical reasons and because the central concepts are very fishy, utilitarian calculation is muffled by pluralism, common-sense and half-heartedness, which is doubtless a mercy, since its unrestricted consequences, especially for justice, can be seen to be alarming. Nevertheless utilitarian patterns of thought carry great rational prestige, not only for social or economic reasons, but because it has often seemed to embody rational and systematic social thought as against the disconnected reflexes of prejudice or habit.
What Rawls has produced is an elaborate system of thoughts on social principles and the demands of justice in society, which can be put alongside utilitarianism in terms of providing a rational ordering of priorities, and yet, being founded on the central role of justice rather than utility, preserves values which have been emphasised by pluralists queasy of utilitarianism’s willingness to sacrifice rights to efficiency. Any such enterprise, obviously, must make its basic moves at a level of high generality; to suppose otherwise would be to misunderstand the nature of the enterprise, and certainly utilitarianism could make no reproach to Rawls on this score. But Rawls does not remain merely at such a level, and the second part of his book contains sensitive and careful reflection on such subjects as civil disobedience and the rights of conscientious objection. In fact—and it is a point remarked by Rawls himself—his method allows more specific conclusions to be reached by philosophical or theoretical means than does utilitarianism. For the utilitarian, almost everything really depends on empirical facts, since he only has the one principle and everything else depends on how satisfactions will empirically work out; while for Rawls more specific considerations are worked into the basic principles themselves and there is correspondingly more ground that can be covered by reflection at the level of principle.
Rawls has two basic principles of justice. The first—and it is the first, having priority of application—is that “each person is to have an equal right to the most extensive total system of equal basic liberties compatible with a similar system of liberty for all.” The second principle, in its final form, is that social and economic inequalities are to be arranged so that they are both to the greatest benefit of the least advantaged, and attached to offices and positions which are open to all under equality of opportunity: allowance being made by what is called the “just savings principle” or responsibilities towards the future (here, as elsewhere, Rawls deals very sharply and sensitively with matters which have been the concern of economic theory, and he returns to a great tradition of Mill and Sidgwick in joining these concerns with those of moral philosophy). The general conception of the two principles of justice taken together is this: “All social primary goods—liberty and opportunity, income and wealth, and the bases of self-respect—are to be distributed equally unless an unequal distribution of any or all of these goods is to the advantage of the least favoured.”
Rawls offers an elaborate set of arguments in explanation and defence of these as the fundamental principles of justice. His arguments are designed to unfold their content, which turns out to be less obvious than one might have first expected; to compare them with alternative embodiments of justice, and also to compare different interpretations which can be given of these principles themselves; and to justify them, in the sense at least of showing that they satisfy certain basic moral opinions or intuitions which his readers may be expected to share with him. Whether the arguments are meant to justify the principles in a sense yet stronger than that, as for instance by showing that they should, or very plausibly should, be assented to by any rational agent—where ‘rational’ is not taken as already importing a suitable range of moral opinions—that is something that I am less than clear about. Why I am unclear about it will perhaps come out better if I look first at the role of the very striking model which Rawls uses to ground and explicate his system, the model of the ‘original position.’
Rawls belongs to the tradition of contract theorists of society, and particularly associates himself with the later and more explicitly moralised version of the contractual model, as it is to be found above all in Rousseau, and also in Kant, the moralist whose influence is most evident in this book.
Rawls of course makes no appeal to any historical or actual contract as underlying society, nor (if I follow him) does he appeal to the idea of a contract in justification of allegiance to the state; as in Rousseau, it is not some tacit consent to a supposed contract which commands allegiance, but rather the moral properties of society, which properties can best be laid bare in the model or analogy of a contract. Rawls’s model is of a set of persons settling jointly on a set of social principles and institutions to which they and their descendants will then be committed. They are to be pictured as making this choice under a certain set of conditions: apart from standing features of their initial situation, as that their powers are limited and roughly equal, scarcity a real but not overwhelming factor, and so on, they are to be understood as making their choice in accordance with certain principles: that their choice is to be in universal terms (that is to say, will apply to everyone), and does not mention any particular persons as, for instance, beneficiaries of the outcome; that the rules and institutions agreed on will be public, and known to all participants (this prevents, among other things, a cynical take-over bid from utilitarians, who often claim that any system which is ultimately best for everybody must really be utilitarian, even if its content is not); and that the choice will be binding and unchangeable. Above all, this imagined choice is pictured as occurring behind a ‘veil of ignorance’ as Rawls calls it: the parties in the original position—as this set-up is called—are pictured as ignorant of their own identities, history, and character, even, indeed, of their own tastes or preferences; though they are to be allowed knowledge of general empirical principles (a departure from total Kantian purity which Rawls is at some pains to justify). Most significantly of all—and this is the central point of the veil of ignorance idea—they do not know what position they will occupy in the social set-up which they are collectively to decide upon. It is Rawls’s claim that in the circumstances imagined, what a rational man would decide upon is a set of institutions arranged on the basis of the two principles of justice he has formulated.
In this light, in particular, we understand the emphasis that those principles put upon the idea that inequalities are to be justified only if they are to the benefit of the least advantaged: the maximin principle, as it is called, of considering each possible set-up from the point of view of the worst-off in each one, and choosing that one in which the worst-off are better off than the worst-off in any other set-up. This emphasis is extremely important in Rawls’s system, and it is one of the things that markedly distinguishes his outlook from that of utilitarian procedures (a point which is rendered absolutely precise in Rawls’s treatment). If you run a risk, behind the veil of ignorance, of ending up in the worst position in the eventual outcome, and you do not even know how big that risk is, it indeed seems rational to make sure, very high among your priorities, that the worst offered in the outcome should be as good as possible.
So Rawls argues. But the first, if not the most basic, question that his treatment suggests is whether that is necessarily rational; or rather, perhaps, granted how underinformed the persons in the original position are, whether we, or they, have enough to decide what is rational. A man who chooses a system in which there is a risk of degraded slavery, but also a chance of tremendous power and prestige, is not evidently more irrational than one who opts for some more Attlee-like alternative—he just has a different temperament. In order to try to block this objection, Rawls cuts his persons off from a lot of basic information about the chances of ending up in one situation rather than another, and also (as I have said) about their own talents and temperament. But then the question arises, of whether in cutting them off from everything that could give a rational edge to the gambler’s approach, he has not cut them off from so much as to make the whole model unintelligible. Rawls tackles the problems of trying to give his hypothetical parties enough information to make the exercise comprehensible, but not too much: there remains a real doubt about whether he has succeeded.
There is one set of theorists to whom Rawls will perhaps have little to say. Rawls’s model of the original position is a striking monument to something which contract-theorists and (in this respect) utilitarians have in common, the belief that particular historical situations enter into political and social calculation only secondarily, along with particular empirical information about the wants and interests of the persons involved. Thus Rawls’s parties are pictured in total abstraction from history, equipped like their Lockean and Rousseauite predecessors only with the draughty coverings of rationality and (perhaps) morality. This presents certain internal difficulties for Rawls’s system: thus I think he is committed to talking about social classes at a stage in the proceedings where he has not provided any conditions for picking out a class as opposed to any arbitrary set of persons within society: what constitutes a class, and a class-interest, is a question that cannot be answered at the level of abstraction from history that Rawls seems to require. Nevertheless, those of us who have felt rather hopelessly that only an untidy pluralism could get anywhere near the complexities of social value must be led to wonder whether what they took for an insightful pessimism may not have been in some part just laziness. Utilitarians, again, will have to salute someone skilled in economic and systematic thought, with a genuinely alternative view. Others of us who may still feel that there is something dauntingly and unrealistically pure about the Kantian principles which Rawls employs, must recognise the extent to which Rawls’s work has raised the level of what is to be expected of any alternative picture. Like all notable philosophical achievements, it will change the basis of discussion over a large area for a long time to come.2
Notes
1. A Theory of Justice, by John Rawls (Clarendon Press, 1972).
2. This review originally appeared as “Bernard Williams on Rawls’s Principles and the Demands of Justice,” Spectator, June 24, 1972.
Beyond Freedom and Dignity, by B. F. Skinner
B. F. Skinner is an American psychologist who is famous for a number of things. He pioneered a particular kind of behaviourist theory, based on the idea of selectively reinforcing by reward certain spontaneously produced patterns of behaviour: the model for learning is thus fundamentally that of evolutionary natural selection. He conducted a famous series of experiments with pigeons. He invented, among other things, an experimental device called the Skinner Box, which provides a totally artificial environment for the study of animal behaviour. He has written a Utopian novel. He has been extensively attacked by Chomsky, originally on the subject of language acquisition, who argued, extremely convincingly, that Skinner’s theories were totally incapable of explaining the learning of language; this controversy extended, no doubt with some help from Chomsky’s own political concerns, into larger areas of discontent with the theories, methods, outlook and ethics of the kind of behaviourism of which Skinner is the outstanding representative.
This book is described on the jacket as ‘the summary of his life work in the scientific analysis of behaviour.’1 This it scarcely can be, since it summarises no actual scientific results at all, but it is presumably meant as a summary of what Skinner thinks the results of his life’s work offer for mankind. It is rambling, repetitive, optimistic, rather well written, and dauntingly stupid.
It is a mixture, in about equal proportions, of ninth-rate philosophy, ill-defined values, and non-existent science. The science is non-existent, it is important to emphasise, not just in the sense that it does not here appear on the page; it is not that Skinner has somewhere else demonstrated what he here repeatedly presupposes, namely that there exists a body of scientific work which enables us to explain and control complex human cultural behaviour in terms of his behaviourist reinforcement theory. No such work exists, and there is very little reason to think that it could exist. Because the accounts given here all rely on promissory notes drawn on a behaviourist bank which we have reasons for thinking is bankrupt, Skinner’s supposed technical terminology in which he naively describes human affairs is exactly what he—in a rather hurt tone—denies it is, a jargon. It is just as scientifically worthless, and a good deal less amusing, than Mr Desmond Morris’s attempts to describe human activities in terms drawn directly from the activities of other primates.
Skinner’s main idea is to move our attention from attempts to explain and control individual behaviour by acting directly on the individual, to a concentration on the environment. A myth which he finds a great obstacle to this is that of what he calls ‘autonomous man’—‘the inner man, the homunculus, the possessing demon, the man defended by the literatures of freedom and dignity.’ As will be gathered from these phrases, it is not easy to discover what exactly Skinner means by ‘autonomous man.’ He makes it harder by starting the book with a set of formulations which are perhaps unnecessarily absurd.
The Greeks, we are told, had a physics which ‘personified’ physical things, and which did not work; physics got going when it stopped treating things as persons. We have not made the same step in psychology and the behavioural sciences: we still talk about human behaviour in a ‘pre-scientific’ and ‘personified’ way. That is to say, Skinner’s opinion seems to be that since it was a mistake to treat things as persons, it must be an equal mistake to treat persons as persons, and the sooner we stop the better. The Greeks (it used to be said) tried to explain the behaviour of things in terms of purposes, because they projected on to the world their own purposes. Now it appears, they made a more basic error, of thinking that they had any purposes themselves.
It may be that Skinner does not have to say anything as silly as this: but it is impossible to tell, because he constantly muddles up the questions of whether we are to speak in terms of individual intentions and purposes at all, with the question of whether social arrangements are best designed in terms of individual intentions and purposes.
The latter, at least, he denies: the ‘literatures of freedom and dignity’ have done great harm in insisting on such ideas as individual responsibility, in particular in its emphasis on punishment, which is, among other things, inefficient—‘much time and energy would be saved’ if other methods of controlling behaviour were adopted. Indeed, there is much to be said against punishment, and the myths that go with it; but Skinner has got nowhere at all in saying it, since he does not even consider most of the issues that bear on the matter: for instance, whether there is any kind of value in having methods of social control which persons subject to them can so far as possible rationally understand.
What values will replace the archaic and pre-scientific myths of freedom and dignity? What will the ‘time and energy’ be saved for? ‘For more reinforcing activities,’ we are told: ‘reinforcing,’ it should be said, is Skinnerese for ‘enjoyable’ or just ‘good.’ What these are, is left in the dark: it is perhaps up to us, though that might seem to Skinner to smell too much of autonomous man.
Central chapters on values and culture offer nothing on the central question except the vaguest kind of co-operatively directed evolutionary ethic. More insight into what Skinner would really like emerges in fact from a book much more revealing than this one, his Utopian novel ‘Walden Two,’ in which the community formed by scientific behaviour control is represented. The general tone is that of a particularly mild and genteel Adult Education Centre, with the performing arts and Sunday painting to the fore. In the present book, Skinner for one moment glimpses the possibility that his social technology might make a difference to art, when suffering danger and ‘the struggle to be good’ have been removed. He is unworried: ‘the art and literature of a new culture will be about other things.’
This is not really a malign book, though it is a profoundly obtuse one. Its jaunty jargon is so pathetically removed from any social reality that it could scarcely produce, directly at least, much evil in practice, though the know-all reductive tone may encourage some enemies of freedom and dignity. More theoretically, the pity is that it can only encourage the idea that the values of humanity, and the scientific understanding of human beings, stand necessarily opposed to one another. If Skinner’s reinforcement theory were really the science in question, that would indeed be so; but in fact scientific understanding is no more present in this book than any other kind.
Note
1. Beyond Freedom and Dignity, by B. F. Skinner (Cape, 1972).
What Computers Can’t Do: A Critique of Artificial Reason, by Hubert L. Dreyfus
Electronic machines of the kind generically called “computers” can now do a number of things at least as well as human beings, and in some cases better. Many of these tasks are boring, such as finding addresses or counting things. Immunity to boredom is one thing that helps to give computers the edge over human beings in some tasks. Another is speed of operation: only a computer could do the calculations necessary for landing a module on the moon, since only a computer could do the sums in less time than it takes the module to get there.
In some cases, the computer’s program guarantees an answer to the problem in hand. Whether this is so depends on several things: first, whether the problem is one for whose solution a determinate procedure (called an algorithm) can be specified. An algorithm is a set of instructions which when carried out is bound eventually to yield what is required. Looking things up in lists and doing addition are two among many tasks for which there exist algorithms, and computers spend most of their time on just such things.
But even if a task can be specified in an algorithm, there remain vitally important questions of whether a machine could complete the task in an acceptable time or within the limits of the amount of information it can process. These restrictions are so important that the question of whether there is an algorithm for a given task may be of little practical interest. Thus, in principle, there could be programs for playing checkers that involved counting out all possible future combinations of moves and countermoves (though even this would not by itself provide the way to choose the best moves). But assuming that at any given point five moves on the average are possible, the number of possibilities twenty moves ahead is greater than the number of microseconds in a year—which forecloses that way of going about it.
For most interesting tasks either there is no algorithm or it is not a practicable one. So machines must be programmed not to grind through the task but to proceed “heuristically”—to search intelligently (as we would put it), to show some insight into what is relevant and promising, and to learn what is useful and what is not. Such programs, of course, are in themselves as determinate as the others, and the machine’s states are still determined by the program and its earlier states: the difference is that the program does not contain instructions which lead inevitably and by exhaustion to a solution, but rather is designed to throw up routines and strategies which should prove fruitful in finding a solution.
In talking of “computers” here I have in mind, as Dreyfus has throughout his book, digital machines, that is to say, machines that represent all the information they handle by combinations of elements each of which can be either of two states (on or off, for instance), and are thus machines which conduct their procedures in a series of discrete steps.1 In saying that a digital machine goes in discrete steps one is saying something about how it represents information; one is not saying that it goes from one physical state to another by instantaneous magic, without going through places in between, but only that the places in between do not have any significance in representing information. When a digital device such as an adding machine is contrasted with an analogue device such as a slide rule, the point is not that one clicks and the other creeps, but that any points that the latter creeps through, however close together, do represent something.
Some still hope, and more fear, that foreseeable developments of these techniques will yield digital machines which over an impressive and growing range of human competence will equal or surpass human ability. In this book Dreyfus aims to refute these expectations and to allay these fears by showing on general philosophical grounds that the aim is impossible and that the research which seeks to develop machine intelligence so that it can solve interesting and really complex problems is doomed to failure, except perhaps in solving some very narrow problems. He starts with the record and claims that there has been over the last fifteen years a repeated pattern of initial minor success, grandiose promises and predictions, then disappointments, diminishing returns, and finally silence as the research bogs down and the promises remain unfulfilled.
Similar patterns can be seen in various fields of computer research. Following Minsky, a leading worker whom he extensively criticizes, Dreyfus distinguishes two main branches of inquiry that have seemed at one time or another very promising. One is Cognitive Simulation (CS), which takes tips from the ways humans actually solve problems and from the short cuts they use, and seeks to provide methods for machines which will significantly reproduce some psychological features of intelligent human behavior in solving mathematical problems, for example, or translating from one language to another. The other, Artificial Intelligence (AI), is, in Minsky’s words,
… an attempt to build intelligent machines without any prejudice toward making the system simple, biological, or humanoid … one might first need experience with working intelligent systems (based if necessary on ad hoc mechanisms) if one were eventually to be able to design more economical schemes. [Quoted by Dreyfus, p. 43]
With both these approaches, initial small successes led to overconfidence: Dreyfus rehearses numerous instances of this. But there is a real question about how significant much of this now aging material is. Even if early predictions of computers’ chess competence were wildly overoptimistic, it really is not very interesting to be told again that a certain chess program was beaten in 1960 by a ten-year-old: it is even less interesting than the fact (a trifle gracelessly admitted by Dreyfus) that more recently a program called MacHack beat Dreyfus.
Artificial Intelligence has gone through a sober process of realizing that human beings are cleverer than it supposed. It has turned to a more cautious and diversified strategy of accumulating “know-how” rather than mounting frontal assaults. These developments—of which one will gather little from Dreyfus—are more appropriate to the sort of phenomenon intelligence is, and the boasts and disappointments which Dreyfus tirelessly rehearses are of decreasing relevance to assessing prospects now.
The more important part of Dreyfus’s case lies not in the references to past history and slow progress, but in the general considerations which, he claims, show that the failures are inevitable and that it is to be expected that relatively trivial initial success will run out when one tries something more complex. The predictions of large success on the basis of small are not just examples of technologists’ euphoria or grant collectors’ publicity, but rely on a principle which is itself fundamental to the kind of analysis that goes into CS and AI, namely that moving from simple to complex is just moving from less to more—that the development of more of the same can be expected, in one way or another, to crack the problem. This principle Dreyfus rejects.
Dreyfus cites a number of features of human experience in problem solving that he claims are essential to problem solving and could not conceivably be reproduced or imitated by a computer. They are all of what might, very loosely, be called a “Gestalt-ish” kind, and include the phenomena of “fringe consciousness” (as when one is dimly aware of the relevance of some ill-defined factor), “zeroing in” (as when a problem-situation “organizes itself around” a promising approach), and tolerance of ambiguity, under which, for example, the mind can succeed in disregarding in a certain context a possible significance of a word which in another context would be the one to present itself. In general, the human mind can seize on what is essential in a given situation and mentally organize the whole problem in the light of this understanding.
It is I, and not Dreyfus, who have assembled this set of requirements for problem solving in such short order, though it must be said that he himself runs through them briskly and successively in his own exposition. But when they are brought together, one gets the first glimpse of a problem which grows throughout Dreyfus’s book, that is, the exact status he assigns to such phenomena. Dreyfus tends to present them as though they were special ways human beings have of going about solving problems, ways not employable by computers but which have to be used if problems are going to be solved. But it is not clear that the requirements are all this, or indeed that they all have any one kind of relevance to problem solving. Thus an ability to distinguish the essential from the inessential does not provide a special way of solving problems, available to humans and lacking to machines: solving a complex problem is itself an exercise in telling the essential from the inessential, and to say that machines cannot do this is not to uncover a deep reason why machines cannot solve that kind of problem, but is just to say that they cannot. Dealing with ambiguity seems to be similar; and it certainly is, if we assume that one aim of the exercise must be to produce machines that can handle natural language.
“Zeroing in,” on the other hand, seems to be of a different, though perhaps rather ambiguous, status. It could just refer to the human ability to arrange the data of a problem in a way conducive to a solution, seeing the relevant ways to use the data, and so on, in which case this ability seems once more logically indistinguishable from an ability to solve the problem, or at least (what is wanted) to solve it economically. But it could, as characterized by Dreyfus, refer to a certain kind of experience, of a Gestalt character, in which the data “turn round” and “structure themselves” and “present themselves” in a relevant way. It is the sort of experience, perhaps, that may be helpful to humans in problem solving. There are many reasons for wondering whether any machine could have an experience of that sort; but also, there are few reasons for supposing that it would have to in order to solve problems.
The confusion here is encouraged, I think, by Dreyfus’s own philosophy, which does the best it can to obliterate distinctions between the problem situation itself and how it seems to the problem solver—a distinction without which the whole issue and some of Dreyfus’s own assertions become unintelligible. He presents certain capacities as at once indispensable to problem solving and inconceivable for the machine. But, on inspection, these items tend to dissolve into some things that are certainly essential to problem solving (as being indeed in various degrees restatements of what problem solving is) but which are not shown to be inconceivable for the machine, and, on the other hand, things of the Gestalt-experience kind that may well be inconceivable for the machine but are not shown to be in themselves essential to problem solving—at least, for machines.
If one lays aside the covert appeal to Gestalt experience, most of Dreyfus’s arguments look thin. He may well be right in claiming that many tasks that are simple for human beings would need systems quite undreamed of in practice for their machine simulation. But his claim to have proved the limitations of computers is exaggerated. If one shakes together the considerations that Dreyfus brings forward, one can extract, I think, three kinds of arguments for his conclusion; and all, it seems to me, leave the issue still open.
First, there is the general “anti-Platonic” argument. This is not so much one argument as a class of considerations, the general upshot of which is that both machine simulations of human skills (such as CS) and machine reproductions by other means of human skills (such as AI) depend on an assumption which is pervasive throughout Western, modern, or at least technological thought, namely, that rationality consists in reducing experience to discrete atomistic elements and handling them by determinate rules of procedure which can be clearly and discursively spelled out.
This assumption Dreyfus repeatedly calls the “Platonic” assumption, thus making a historical claim which it would be tedious to go on about, but which in some of its applications at least is downright amazing; as in the apparent suggestion (pp. 123–124) that Plato had the quasi-technological ambition of reducing the empirical world to determinate rule-governed order—something which the historical Plato repeatedly claimed to be impossible. (Though Dreyfus frequently quotes Heidegger, he does not in this historical connection; but the picture of Western intellectual history of course comes from Heidegger, who holds that Socrates and Plato with their clanging inhuman essences scared off the pre-Socratics, those shepherds of Being.)
Dreyfus contests what he calls the “Platonic” assumption on several planes. At the psychological level, his point seems to be that human beings do not in fact think about things, and could not solve problems, just by a “Platonic” style of step-by-step discursive thought. This seems true, but of doubtful relevance; it may tell against some machine men who claim to be guided by actual psychological data, but beyond that it seems to loop back into the Gestalt-experience consideration. Even when it is the aim of a machine intelligence researcher to construct a program which will solve problems “the way we do,” it cannot be a requirement that the program should have the same sort of shape as our experience of solving problems—indeed, it is not in the least clear what such a requirement would mean. Admittedly—and here Dreyfus makes a good bit of capital—the idea of a machine solving problems “the way we do” is itself very unclear; but, as we shall see, Dreyfus has neglected to look in the obvious direction from which content might be given to that idea.
In any case, for AI researchers the aim is not to get a machine to solve problems “the way we do,” but just to get a machine to solve problems. Against them also Dreyfus applies his “anti-Platonic” argument, on the ground that their assumptions about the possibility of modeling intelligent activity on a digital machine involve the “Platonic” assumption, not this time about the processes of human thought, but about what the world is like and what an explanation or theory about the world, and about intelligent behavior, must be like. A theory about intelligent activity might be “Platonic” without that activity itself being “Platonic,” as the movement of the planets can be described in differential equations without the planets themselves solving differential equations; but, Dreyfus argues, there is no reason to believe that such a theory, which might enable one to model the behavior in a digital machine, is possible, and it is only the “Platonic” assumption that makes people think that it is possible.
The trouble in evaluating Dreyfus’s argument here is that he leaves it unclear exactly how a theory can be said to be “Platonic,” and how strong a restriction on the theory this is. His argument requires at least that any theory which can be modeled in a digital machine is “Platonic”; but he himself mentions the important result that any analogue theory can, if it is sufficiently precise, be modeled in a digital machine as well. He has an argument apparently designed to get round this fact, but I have not been able to understand it. It is not even clear how far round it he wants to get.
Dreyfus’s rejection of the “Platonic” assumption seems to boil down to the usual antimechanist, antiphysicalist, or antideterminist claim that intelligent behavior cannot be scientifically understood, which it will be no surprise to find is rejected by AI researchers. I do not think that Dreyfus wants it just to come down to that, but I have not found enough in his characterization of the “Platonic”—once the Gestalt-experience element is laid aside—to stop it from just coming down to that.
Dreyfus’s second general argument might be called the “all or nothing” or “form of life” argument. The clearest application of this is in the centrally important matter of understanding natural language, and the ability of speakers to cope with a high level of ambiguity, to catch on to what is relevant, and so forth. The sad failure of the project, much vaunted at one time, of constructing programs to translate from one natural language to another has revealed among other things how much information about the world a machine has to have available to it in order to make sense of even very simple human communications; and also how flexible and open-ended the deployment of that information has to be if the computer program, even when it seems to be getting along quite well, is not to collapse into breathtaking idiocy.
Dreyfus rightly emphasizes the importance of this sort of consideration but his treatment of the point is exaggerated. On matters of fact, he fails to acknowledge the extent to which current work on natural language programs shows greatly increased sensitivity to context; and on questions of principle, his treatment tends to distract attention from some of the most interesting questions that might be asked. He claims that the ever-present need of interpretation, and the indefinite range of knowledge and understanding that the human has to call upon, mean that we have to take a human being’s “world” as a whole; Wittgenstein’s celebrated remark about a language being a “form of life” is used here to suggest how much a whole way of being would have to be given to a machine if it were really to deal intelligently with its environment and properly understand what was said to it.
But might not this just be overdoing it? For one thing—to mention an issue which is hardly ever touched on by Dreyfus—even if the human world of understanding has this vast and indivisible complexity, perhaps the intelligent activity of some simpler organism might be adequately simulated? Some of Dreyfus’s other arguments would no doubt aim to exclude that as well; but so far as this argument goes, it is as well to remember that machine intelligence would already have had a vast triumph if it could simulate on any substantial scale the intelligent activity of creatures less culturally elaborated than man.
Another, and more important, point is that Dreyfus’s exclusive insistence on the ways in which human abilities, when all are present and working, are tightly interrelated, and on the extent to which information of different types is brought to bear on interpretative questions in various and plastic ways, distracts attention from the question of the extent to which abilities might be separable from one another, and of the kinds of simplifications which might yield a recognizable fragment of human intelligent behavior. Dreyfus seems, indeed, to think that the idea of such a fragment is nonsense; but we need more than phenomenological descriptions of the experience (or “world”) of the functioning human being to convince us of that. We need detailed theoretical and experimental study of simpler animals and partial abilities, and Dreyfus’s argument, which is all about a world both whole and human, neither proves its impossibility nor anticipates its results.
Dreyfus seems to make the demand that machines, in order to be intelligent at all, should be unfailingly at least as intelligent as human beings sometimes are. That demand is absurd; and, further, there is little reason to believe that the ways in which machines will succeed and fail in displaying intelligence will be just the same as with human beings or other animals. We should expect neither that machines will make no mistakes, nor that their mistakes will necessarily be related in a familiar human way to their successes.
The third general argument, or type of argument, is the “infinite regress” argument, which rests on the idea that the rules or principles of understanding that human beings use need interpretation and that their application is in various ways relative to context. Now rules or principles of a higher order can be used, which determine the application of the ones of a lower rank, and sort contexts into different kinds; but then these rules will themselves need interpretation. If every rule needs another rule, this leads to a vicious regress; it has to be stopped. It cannot be stopped, Dreyfus argues, by an appeal to rules that are intrinsically independent of the context they are to be applied to, or are self-interpreting—there are no such things, and the idea that there are is a fiction of “Platonic” thinkers. Rather, the regress stops, as Wittgenstein (once more) claimed, in certain concrete facts of human life and practice: we do just “go on” in certain ways, “catch on” to some things rather than others; justifications come to an end in a shared form of life.
I find this argument difficult because it is not clear to me what exactly these concrete facts are, and in particular whether they apply to the species as a whole, or culturally differ between societies, to mention only the crudest alternatives—a difficulty which I also have with Wittgenstein’s own account of them. The impression often given by such arguments is that these facts—which no doubt exist—are in some basic way inexplicable: an impression much helped by the very fact that one is given no adequate directions about the level (cultural, psychological, zoological) on which one should look for them, and hence for their explanation. But while facts of this kind no doubt exist, there is no reason at all to expect them to be inexplicable. Until it is made clear why they have to remain inexplicable, it is likely to remain unclear why knowledge of them, or of some weak but adequate version of them, cannot be modeled into a machine.
I have already mentioned Dreyfus’s own philosophy, which provides the basis for some of his criticism, and which he even claims is capable of producing explanations of intelligent and purposive behavior more adequate than any available to “Platonic” theories. The philosophy in question is a type of phenomenology owing much to Heidegger and to Merleau-Ponty. It is not, at least in this offering, very easy to take it seriously, or even patiently. One of its characteristics is its reliance on terms which sound explanatory, but which in fact conceal in their ambiguity many of the real questions that need to be asked:
But what if the work of the central nervous system depends on the locomotive system, or to put it phenomenologically, what if the “higher,” determinate, logical, and detached forms of intelligence are necessarily derived from and guided by global and involved “lower” forms? [Pp. 148–149]
What indeed? “Derived from” and “guided by” here are sheer bluff, and will remain so unless some more “Platonic” work is done.
Another trait—almost definitional of the method—is to offer a graphic, and often pointedly inaccurate, description of a perceived situation which allegedly reveals its nature:
Thus, in ordinary situations, we say we perceive the whole object, even its hidden aspects, because the concealed aspects directly affect our perception. [P. 153]
That contains at least two straightforward falsehoods, and unhelpful ones: to suggest that such characterizations could helpfully replace scientific investigation of why and how things look solid under certain conditions is absurd.
Such untruths have a built-in defense mechanism: they are so obviously untrue that anyone who protests of their literal falsehood can be accused of having missed their nonliteral point. But that mechanism is not enough to keep them alive in a world of hard questions; nor, incidentally, to justify their use by Dreyfus, who earlier in the book has gone in for a great deal of donnish nit-picking against formulations, loose but often adequately intelligible, offered by people on the other side.
Another characteristic feature of phenomenology that deeply affects Dreyfus’s argument is its traditional tendency, despite heroic efforts on the part of its leading exponents, to slide inexorably in the direction of idealism, the view that the world can only be coherently regarded as the-world-as-it-seems-to-us, or, worse still, the-world-as-it-seems-to-me. Dreyfus constantly uses formulae that present the world which men perceive and act in as already constituted by their experiences and perceptions: thus at page 136 he seems to accept that “only in terms of situationally determined relevance are there any facts at all”; and at page 184 writes, “We are at home in the world and can find our way about in it because it is our world produced by us as the context of our pragmatic activity … [our] activity has produced the world.” Even my personal memories are “inscribed in the things around me” (p. 178).
Of course, there are ways of taking these sayings. But it seems that Dreyfus wants to take them in such a way that the whole idea of a scientific theory which regarded the objects of the human world—such as trees, for instance—in abstraction from human interests would be absurd. From that, I am inclined to think, he derives his most general “anti-Platonic” opinions: if the objects of the human world cannot be regarded in abstraction from human perception, activities, and interests, then there can be no scientific account which takes such objects and human beings, and inquires how they interact.
But if that argument is going to work, it looks as though the idealistic premise from which it has to be derived must be taken in an enormously strong and indeed lunatic way. It has to be taken, in fact, in such a form as to imply that, since trees are “produced” and so forth by human interests, a world in which there were no humans would be a world without trees—indeed, it would not be a world at all. If one objects to this, naïvely, by saying that it must be possible for there to be a world without humans, because there used to be a world without humans (including, however, trees), the reply will be that one has misunderstood.
But the use that Dreyfus makes of these idealist formulae for his purposes seems to me precisely to require the crude, indeed laughable, interpretation which he would immediately reject. For if we can conceive of trees without humans, why cannot we scientifically investigate their interactions with humans? If the sense in which the world is “produced” by humans is just the less hectic sense in which the world must be described from a human point of view, why is it impossible that among the things described from that point of view are the causal relations involved in the human perception of trees?
Dreyfus does not, however, surrender everything to the realm of production by human experience; apart from our experience, and really “there” in some sense, is a flux of energy, atomic particles, things as described by physics. Indeed, he admits that man is a physical system interacting like others with his physical environment, and that “inputs of energy of various frequencies are correlated with the same perceptual experience” (p. 95). Moreover, according to Dreyfus, the impossibility of digital simulation is not supposed to exclude the possibility of artificial organisms, if these are conceived of in terms of analogue systems, no doubt embodied in biological materials. But Dreyfus makes these concessions very lightly and clearly regards the levels of physical or neurophysiological explanation, which he is happy to concede, as something quite detached from the possibility, which he rules out, of the simulation of intelligent activity by digital means.
But Dreyfus does not see how much his offhand concessions to science may have cost him. For if we can gain enough physical knowledge to construct an artificial organism, and if construct it is what we do, as opposed to growing it in vitro from ready-made biological materials, then we understand it. And if we understand it so that we can construct it to behave in certain ways, then we understand the relation of its physical structure to its possibilities of behavior, in the sense at least that we understand what kinds of physical differences underlie what kinds of differences in behavior.
Moreover, there is no a priori reason why the possibility of yielding certain behavior should be restricted to structures in one given sort of material; it would rather prove, perhaps, to be indeed the structure of a system which provided the required potentiality. And if we got to that stage, then even if it were an analogue system that we had uncovered, it is unclear why in principle it should be impossible to model it in a digital machine. I see nothing in Dreyfus’s frequent complaints against those who have confused physical and psychological levels that blocks this road to the positions he supposes himself to have cut off. This is the direction in which content can be found for the notion that a machine physically very different from us might solve problems or do other things “as we do.” It also provides the sense—the only interesting sense for these investigations—to the question “How does man, or another animal, produce a given kind of behavior?”
Dreyfus says at one point (p. 144) of the question “How does man produce intelligent behavior?” that
… the notion of “producing” behavior … is already colored by the [Platonic] tradition. For a product must be produced in some way; and if it isn’t produced in some definite way, the only alternative seems to be that it is produced magically.
Well, one ambiguity, rather tediously, has to be removed: of course it isn’t necessary that a given sort of behavior must on every occasion be produced in the same definite way, nor would a machine have to produce it always in the same way. But if the thought is that a given piece of behavior can appear on a given occasion, and not be produced on that occasion in some definite way—then yes, indeed, it would be produced magically. That is the magic Dreyfus is calling us to from his counter-Platonic cavern. But however depressed we may sometimes be by the threats and promises of the machine men, we are not forced in there yet.
Note
1. What Computers Can’t Do: A Critique of Artificial Reason, by Hubert L. Dreyfus (Harper & Row, 1972).
Wisdom: Twelve Essays, edited by Renford Bambrough
John Wisdom, who this year retired as professor of philosophy at the University of Oregon, for many years taught at Cambridge. The most important fact of his philosophical life has been the influence of the later Wittgenstein, to which his publications bear strong witness from 1937 onwards; though he had published a number of things before that, including a book, Problems of Mind and Matter, it is as an exponent of Wittgensteinian ideas that he has, perhaps, most generally been regarded, and indeed has given the impression, in some of his most influential works, of regarding himself.
It is not an adequate assessment of him, as Renford Bambrough insists in the preface to this book of papers by various authors; and it can be added that if it were, Wisdom’s writings could not now be of much interest.1 When Wisdom wrote his best-known pieces on Wittgensteinian themes, the later work of Wittgenstein was largely unknown, confined to disciples, and transmitted by eager rumour and clandestine notes; but since Wittgenstein’s death in 1951 publication of an extensive nachlass has, if not exactly enabled Wittgenstein to speak for himself (since much of it, seemingly, Wittgenstein did not wish to be heard), at least enabled each of us to cope more directly with the question of what Wittgenstein had to say.
Regarded just as a source, or as a display of Wittgensteinian ideas, Wisdom’s work was in any case always stylistically too idiosyncratic; and the publication of Wittgenstein’s work, again, does not help, since if one is forced to a comparison of these two ways of writing philosophy in a style without exposition or the apparatus of proof, Wisdom’s jokiness runs the risk of coming out of it as English things do from some other comparisons with Viennese things (music, for instance). Quite apart from Wittengensteinian comparisons, Wisdom’s style is rather perilous; at its most extreme, in the remarkable series of articles Other Minds (reprinted in a book of that name), though often it can be funny and revealing, it runs risks of being coy or facetious or resonantly vague—signs of strain, I suspect, generated by the difficulties in Wisdom’s basic philosophical enterprise of accommodating to one another imagination, common sense, and what was in its origins a strongly positivist theory of knowledge.
Wisdom developed his philosophy in a climate in which positivism and logical empiricism were particularly lively influences, and while his work can be seen as a reaction against or move away from positivism, with its view of science as a summary of observations, its sharp distinction between verbal and factual truth, its verificationist view of meaning, nevertheless positivism recognizably shaped its interests. Positivism condemned metaphysical remarks as meaningless: Wisdom expounds kinds of meaning for them, which consist in their being paradoxically illuminating or reminding us of overlooked truths by saying what is literally absurd, or using words in a way which makes us see things which some theoretical obsession has obscured. Such an approach leaves a place for the imagination, and also a role for philosophy, which will at the very least always find some balance that needs redressing, some exaggeration that demands a counter-reminder. He has also stressed those forms of human rationality which were of least interest to positivism’s scientific outlook, such as those deployed in legal argument, the comparison of one case with another.
Yet for all that, this philosophy seems to share with positivism a view that, whatever the value of philosophy, it is certainly something quite special, different in particular from the sciences: the idea that philosophy could be continuous with other activities, and that there can be no special problem about the meaning of philosophical propositions as such, remain equally remote from both outlooks, and in the same direction. That impression is strengthened by the nature of the role that Wisdom found for philosophical remarks, which was peculiarly protreptic: their meaning had to be explained in terms of their ability to make us see things differently, and in this they stood in important and explanatory contrast to some class of factual propositions whose meaning lay more directly in how they related to the world.
There is also the issue of scepticism. Positivism, like all forms of empiricism, centred itself on the theory of knowledge, and had a series of encounters with skepticism; its task was to find the warrant in sense perception for various kinds of supposed knowledge, and where that warrant seemed to be defective, the evidence not to reach up to the conclusions; there was a sceptical vacuum. Wisdom has himself constantly returned to issues about scepticism, in particular scepticism about other minds, the worrying doubt that we do not really know that anyone else has experiences. He has patiently circled round and round this issue, and has given ingenious and memorable help with it. He has resisted positivist, as all other, theories.
But the problem is set for him in a quite positivist way. One moderately primitive answer that might be given to the question of how we know that other people have experiences is that it is an empirical hypothesis which explains very well how they behave. When we are disposed to give this answer, Wisdom discourages us by saying that our belief cannot be an inductive analogical argument, an extrapolation from observed instances: for if it were, it could not (if adequate) be based on just one case, and moreover there would have to be independent verification of the conclusion, which is here in principle impossible. But the assumption that an empirical hypothesis would have to be based on such an argument and satisfy these conditions, is the straight positivist assumption that empirical explanation depends on inductive generalization, which work in the philosophy of science gives us no reason to accept. It is interesting that the exposition of Wisdom’s philosophy by Gasking which forms the first chapter of the present book (the only piece to have appeared before, and now twenty years old) itself takes the inductivist and verificationist assumptions so totally for granted that in its formal setting out of Wisdom’s argument they do not even appear as a separate premiss, but are presupposed in the conclusion.
In tone, Wisdom’s philosophy is not at all like that of positivist philosophers. It gained its complex allusiveness and rejection of explicit doctrine from the later Wittgenstein. It acquired from another Cambridge source, G. E. Moore, a belief in the plainness of certain plain facts and in the oddness of philosophers’ professing to doubt those facts—the weirdness, in general, of philosophical scepticism. Wisdom does not just reject that scepticism, he seeks to interpret it, explain it, see its illuminations. But while we should be sympathetic, grateful indeed, to sceptical aberrations, he will not let us forget, or at least for too long, that they are aberrations.
This approach does well to remind us that, and how, metaphysical remarks are not merely some additional remarks about how the world is, to be treated flatly like other putative additions to our knowledge. But it has the disadvantage, in particular, of making all forms of philosophical scepticism seem basically the same, and implying that the patient, sympathetic, diagnostic and possibly grateful attitude which is obviously the best that can be expected by some forms (such as scepticism about the material world, or the past, or other people’s pains) is equally appropriate to others (such as scepticism about free will, or morality) which not only have a quite different claim on our attention but might actually be right. “Philosophy is the conflict of the obvious with the obvious”, Mr Bambrough writes here; but the idea that the world may be in certain very important respects altogether different from what it seems is both sound and an important motivation to serious philosophy.
It has been said that all of Wisdom’s philosophy is about what philosophy is. Though his best single piece (“Metaphysics and Verification”, 1938) is about philosophy, the claim is in general not true: as witness the series about other minds which, despite many dicta about philosophy, is certainly about knowledge of other minds. Yet, for all that, there is reason behind the false claim. Wisdom’s underlying outlook provides no direct way of addressing oneself to a philosophical view, or just arguing with it: one diagnoses it, or sees it as helpful, or illuminating, or misleading, and those attitudes are higher-order in a way in which to say of a view that it is true or false is not, except formally: to say that a view is true is to say that things are so, to say than a view is illuminating or helpful is not—it is nearer to saying something about those who hear it.
The tendency of the Wisdomian method to lead discussions back to the nature of philosophy is manifested in a few of the pieces in this book. The book is in effect a Festschrift, with some pieces about Wisdom, others about topics in or near his interests. It has the faults of the genre: there is a good deal of overlap, some central subjects get left out (surprisingly, there is nothing on Wisdom’s concern with psychoanalysis), there is no criticism of Wisdom at all, and the pieces are of very uneven merit. Among the good ones, M. R. Ayers refreshingly introduces broader theoretical perspective, in relating some Wisdomian considerations to Chomsky’s views; and Keith Gunderson says some very interesting things about physicalism, and even, since he can write well, earns a place for his jokes. Judith Jarvis Thompson contributes not only a paper but the frontispiece; her paper is good, but her fond photograph of Wisdom is a masterpiece.
Note
1. Wisdom: Twelve Essays, edited by Renford Bambrough (Blackwell, 1974).
The Socialist Idea, edited by Stuart Hampshire and L. Kolakowski
What is socialist thought? It is the attempt to work out systematically the consequences of the three revolutionary values of 1789, in the context of a world transformed by industrialism and capitalism. It is in effect the only systematic political thought we have. Most of the alternatives really come, in one way or another, to saying that there can be no systematic thought at all about the realisation of political values. There has been in the past intellectually elaborated conservative thought, but there is not much of it around today; while nationalism, when it comes to express its further hopes for society, has few of its own terms in which to do so: more often than not, it turns to something it calls ‘socialism.’
Socialist thought displays divergent varieties and manifest tensions. This is hardly surprising: its problems are due, not so much to a special weakness of socialism, as to the difficulty of any political thought which aims to be at once ambitious, coherent, and realistic.
The tensions are certainly daunting enough. The demands for equality, justice, rationality in the deployment of resources, and the harnessing of industrial power to give material elbow-room for the free development of personality, point in the direction of centralised power; the need for a sense of control over one’s environment, liberty in work, a decrease of alienation, and a greater sense of community, point to decentralised power, industrial democracy, and possibly syndicalist solutions. (It is a good thing that Tony Benn reminds us of these various aims; it is less good that he supposes that by looking zealous enough he can make the evident conflicts among them go away.)
Again, there is no reason to think that industrial democracy could increase anyone’s freedom outside institutions of a wider political democracy, nor has anything proved better than parliamentary democracy in guarding the most elementary freedoms. Yet it would be idiotic to deny the doubts inspired by the gap between its pretensions and reality. Parliamentary democracy claims not just to manage society, but to embody and provide freedom, but it is in the area of that value, let alone in that of equality, that its response is found by many to be thin.
The present book is a collection of papers which explores, unevenly but with some real success, these and other such tensions, and the prospects for socialist thought.1 It grew out of a conference held at Reading University in 1973: the title, ‘What Is Wrong with the Socialist Idea?’ was later changed, by a revision worthy of a Fabian drafting committee, to ‘Is there Anything Wrong with the Socialist Idea?’ That original note of discouragement is not altogether absent from the volume; and the collection is set off rather powerfully, in fact, in that direction since a piece which is both the first and one of the most powerfully presented, by Leszek Kolakowski, offers reflections which are discouraged at a deep level. The point and power of socialism in the form of a (humanistic) Marxism, he argues, lay in an idea of the restoration, or perhaps the first creation, of a human self-identity, a wholeness of human personality, not attainable under existing social and economic formations and this idea he is disposed now to see as a myth, simplistic, Rousseauite and dangerous.
Kolakowski’s background (a leading exponent of critical Marxism, he was expelled from Poland in 1968) does not permit triumphant remarks from non-Marxists; and certainly there is no room for condescension from those of us who work for social democratic improvements and just postpone, or take for granted, the question of what picture of human life might be served by the society within which those improvements are defined. Yet, the modest degree of encouragement which Kolakowski permits himself in his introduction might receive a certain impetus from a tradition originally more sceptical: he offers as almost an anti-socialist admission the truism that not all human values can be rendered compatible, but that truism, true as it undoubtedly is, means a defeat only to the most optimistic kinds of socialism—to others, it helps to define the task.
The shadow of socialism as it has developed in Eastern Europe hangs heavily over quite a lot of this book. Practically no one has much to say for it and several Eastern European writers have impressive things to say against it. Mario Nuti finds himself more or less alone in his perception of Eastern European societies as at least farther on the way to genuine socialism and freedom than mixed Western societies, a position in which he finds mysteriously comforting the idea that, the party managers not being in Marxist terms a class, the exploitation of the workers ‘will … not be a class exploitation, and their condition will be capable of being redressed by a “cultural” revolution….’ I should have liked to hear him discuss that proposition with Kolakowski.
Despite the critique of the Eastern party bureaucracies, however, this book is refreshingly free from the old, and typically British, idea that Marxist and non-Marxist strains of socialism have nothing to say to each other. There is only a small amount of biblical exegesis of Marx; at the same time, even those writers who make least use of strictly Marxist doctrine show themselves sensitive to the effects of Marxist ideas in the present situation: so Richard Lowenthal, in a beautifully set out and clear-headed piece on the future of socialism in the advanced democracies.
One form that the old idea of the separation of Marxist from non-Marxist traditions has taken, again typically in Britain, is the very general form of saying that non-Marxist socialism can be metaphysically pure, free from broad world-pictures, as Marxism cannot. This view must surely contain more falsehood than truth. To the important, and difficult, job of establishing their proportions this volume gives some help, if only intermittently; Charles Taylor, in particular, brilliantly argues that an ideology of an ‘expressive’ rather than an ‘instrumentalist’ kind, is what is needed to make sense of any form of socialism faced with late capitalism.
Stuart Hampshire, on the other hand, is disposed to see the dependence of much socialism on general pictures of man as a weakness; and argues, discouragingly, for both the necessity and the non-existence of detailed social scientific knowledge to govern political planning. But—apart from the question of whether there could be such pure knowledge—there is the vital issue of who, how, and with what authority, would apply such knowledge in planning whom: that is also an issue of which the socialist tradition is, happily, aware.
Note
1. The Socialist Idea, edited by Stuart Hampshire and L. Kolakowski (Weidenfeld and Nicolson, 1974).
Anarchy, State, and Utopia, by Robert Nozick
Why is there a state at all? Or, rather, why should there be a state at all? What is the justification of the state? The sense that these are real questions has come and gone and come again at various times; when that sense is present, the questions step in as the basic or first questions of political philosophy. It is not obvious that they are real questions, that the demand for a justification is a sound one. For one thing, one might be prepared to spend time on the justification only if one had an idea of some alternative to the state, and it is reasonable to feel that there are, at least now, no real candidates for that.
Differently, one may reflect that thoughts about justification could get a grip only if there were some set of principles or values which were sufficiently independent of the state (in general) to give one some leverage on the question. If the ideas by means of which the state is to be levered into or out of the arena of acceptability themselves presuppose the state, we shall effect nothing. But some, with Hegel somewhere behind them, will feel that there is fair doubt on that score—the moral ideas which supposedly provide the leverage will seem to them not only to be the historical product of the state (which is certainly true, but may not be damaging), but also, in some damaging sense, to get their life from the context of the state. This last group of doubters have also their Marxist relatives, who can, dimly, discern a better world without the state—it is, after all, what the revolutionary process should eventually lead to—but who regard present moralizing about the existence of the state as footling, and ideologically polluted.
Doubters of these last kinds are not going to be reassured by Robert Nozick’s original, remarkable, and strikingly intelligent book.1 He has nothing directly to say to their worries, though they should have things to learn from various of his arguments, and they should at least be forced by this energetic and inventive undertaking to put their claims in a clearer and better-argued form. As should anyone who wants to think effectively both about the existence of the state, and about what goes on in the state: for Mr Nozick not only revives the exercise of justifying the state, but comes out with some startlingly unfashionable conclusions about what it should be up to—or at least, what it should ideally be up to. This qualification, I shall suggest at the end, is of huge importance: the “ideally” is the clue to why Mr Nozick’s book is not what it seems, nor (still less) what some unsavoury people will, with some encouragement from the author, undoubtedly take it to be.
Mr Nozick goes back to the traditional business of justifying the state from the ground up, the ground being provided by an imaginary set of circumstances in which there is no state; this is called by Mr Nozick, as by the tradition, the State of Nature. This, in his presentation, helps us to understand what the state is being justified against: drawing on some particularly American elements in the anarchist tradition, he spends much more time and ingenuity than anyone else has ever done in spelling out how things might go in a partly moralized State of Nature, where various private “protective associations” do the job, for a fee, of protecting people’s rights of life, property, and so on, against force and fraud. It is partly moralized in the sense that the people in it do, for a good bit of the time, but not unfailingly, abide by moral considerations, where these are identified by Mr Nozick with a hardcore set of notions about rights, linked rather loosely with Kantian ideas about treating people as ends and not purely as means. (Utilitarians, of course, will not accept the moral starting-point: Mr Nozick assumes, I think reasonably, that no one with whom it is worth having the argument of this book will be a Utilitarian (really), and he makes on the way some excellent remarks to encourage people to realize that they are not.)
In taking the partly moralized starting-point, Mr Nozick is in line with Locke (an author to whom he closely, and surprisingly often, refers back). More explicitly free, of course, than Locke from any historical implications of the model, he differs more deeply by excluding any idea of a contract: this is State-of-Nature theory without the social contract. In its place, he aims to derive the state from the starting-point of the model by a chain of events which involve no intentional intervention: by what he calls an invisible hand mechanism, adopting in this the language of classical economics, which alone of the social sciences is used in the book and whose methods provide some important parts of its intellectual structure. The mechanism which eventually, and after some pretty densely presented speculations, delivers the state without anyone intending it embodies an important idea of Schelling’s in decision theory (and has some similarity to David Lewis’s recent work on convention). It is an elegant idea to apply to classical State-of-Nature theory a mechanism by which one can arrive at a convention without (so to speak) holding one.
The state which is delivered is, as once more with Locke, the minimum “night-watchman” state of classical liberal theory, doing no more than protect its citizens from force and fraud and such like, leaving them free to pursue their individual projects. Mr Nozick shares Locke’s distaste for taxation, and there is a tough-minded economic argument to represent it as a form of forced labour (though I must warn the CBI [Confederation of British Industry], before they prematurely rejoice over this liberating intellectual event, that we shall see that the consequences of all this for things as they are are very far from clear). Traditional State-of-Nature theorists, in justifying the state, inevitably justified a state of one kind rather than another, with one set rather than another of powers and restrictions: that was a main point of the exercise. Mr Nozick is no exception, and the argument in the first part of the book, which justifies against the anarchists the existence of the minimal state, is followed by a second part (as ingeniously argued, but more relaxedly written) which claims against socialists, nationalists, and indeed most people that the minimum state is the most that can be justified, and that more ambitious moral claims for the role of the state, in particular to produce justice by redistributive measures, are mistaken. Such powers, which are of course claimed in varying degrees by all modern states, have, according to Mr Nozick, no moral basis and offend against people’s individual rights.
The major effort in the second half of the book is the attempt to argue against conceptions of justice (in particular, but not exclusively, that of John Rawls) that yield redistributive conclusions, and to give another conception, which does not: we shall come back to it later. The book ends with an engaging sketch of a pluralistic, libertarian Utopia, which has the unusual property of really carrying through the libertarian ideal by not laying it down even that people should live in a libertarian manner. The libertarian arrangements exist at the higher-order level of permitting a large number of very various communities between which people may move—they are all ordered within the merely Lockean framework, but in themselves they may be as restrictive or unpermissive as you (or rather they) like. Some of the difficulties which might spring to mind about these arrangements are rather disarmingly foreseen.
There is also, it should be mentioned, a bravura short chapter in which it is argued that the modern state might, after all, be justified (that is, in Mr Nozick’s terms, could come into existence without violating anyone’s rights). However, the squeamish reader should be warned against pressing this argument against the general tenor of Mr Nozick’s conclusions. For the construction proceeds via everyone’s selling himself into slavery; and while Mr Nozick himself, more permissive here than Locke, thinks that everyone has the moral right to do this, and hence that the results of it are not for that reason impermissible, it is typical of this structurally sophisticated and self-aware book that the reader should find himself in an ironical stand-off with Mr Nozick on this way of getting to the modern state.
The two major parts of the book, the minimally positive and the ambitiously negative, are connected with each other in more than one way. The aim of the second part is to show that no larger state is justified, by removing what Mr Nozick takes to be the major moral arguments in favour of such a state, namely arguments from distributive justice (only the larger state can be in a position to redistribute, in the interest of what mistaken theories take to be justice). Other arguments, and indeed other moral arguments, might be thought of to support the state. But Mr Nozick is interested only in a relatively narrow range even of moral considerations: those, roughly, to do with rights, justice and the crossing of one person’s “moral boundaries” by another. It is this which dictates the narrow compass of what he thinks has to be said about the more ambitious state; equally, it controls the construction of the minimal state.
Now there is an argument for using the absolute minimum of hardcore moral notions in the first part of the book in the justification of the minimal state. For here one is arguing with someone like the libertarian anarchist, whose ideas these are, and the shape of the argument is to say: “Look, even with those (few) moral ideas one can get to the state” (though of course the rest of us, neither libertarian anarchists nor very tempted by them, might say right at the beginning that the anarchists’ bag of moral ideas was too small anyway, and that we saw no interest in trying to cram that morally elaborated item, the state, into it). But, even if one is prepared to defend the state against them on the strength of this moral hard-tack, one is not bound to say that this is all the argument, even of a moral character, that can be brought to bear on the state; nor, correspondingly, are we bound to think that the only defence of the more elaborate state is to be found in applications of those, or closely related, notions. We might think that there were other values besides justice which the more elaborated state alone could advance: and that there was nothing in the intuitions employed in the first part of the book which will exclude these other values being weighed in the evaluation of the state. Mr Nozick’s defence of his negative claim, that the more elaborate state is not justified, is inevitably weakened by the restrictions imposed on the range of arguments which he considers in favour of such a state.
Not just the second part of the book, but the first part as well, would be weakened if it could be shown that even the hardcore values, the minimal moral package of notions about rights, derived some essential support from sources outside the limited repertoire of the State of Nature (one form of that view, of course, would be held by those theorists I mentioned at the beginning, who think that in one way or another the minimal moral notions themselves derive their life from the state—indeed, from the elaborated state). Locke’s treatment has often been criticized on that score; Mr Nozick’s sophisticated reversion to Locke collects sophisticated versions of the criticisms, and it is surprising he has not done more to head them off.
In particular, he has tried—using, obviously, much ingenuity in the attempt—to get to his destination while avoiding any general discussion of a notion central to his views: property. He does have something to say about Locke’s requirement that, when those in the State of Nature acquire things, there should be “enough and as good left over” for others. But, apart from that (which presents certain special problems for his theory of entitlement), he does not really address himself to the issue of what is an originally just holding at all, or of property as (what he requires) a purely moral notion. Hence, while there is a great deal in the discussion of the State of Nature about people’s “boundaries” and how they get crossed, there is no discussion of where their boundaries are, or of how they get drawn. There is thus a persistent doubt about whether the State of Nature can really be got off the ground without taking for granted conventions and institutions of a kind which the State of Nature does not itself provide. Certainly we cannot hope to get clear about this just by using such intuitions as we have as things are about non-legal and informal ideas of property—they can too readily be seen as extensions of more institutionalized notions.
Another difficulty with the State-of-Nature argument is what its rules are. Mr Nozick reckons to have succeeded in his task against the libertarian anarchist if an invisible-hand mechanism would produce the state without violating anyone’s rights, granted that the individuals are (partly) moralized. But there is an obscurity about why this thought-experiment operates as it does (why, one might equally say, this is the thought-experiment). Mr Nozick presents us with a set of persons who behave like economic men, but within the side-constraints, for the most part, of minimal morality; only “for the most part”, since a lot of the machinery is designed to deal with persons who do violate others’ boundaries, and not all such violations are unintentional. Now the steps in the development of the thought-experiment, though many and complex, are notably unrealistic, if judged from the position of social or psychological credibility. Thus, to take just one of many examples, the protection agencies, which are in economic competition with one another, show a commendable zeal in establishing the rights and wrongs of claims against their clients; but even a modest lack of optimism about human nature would suggest that in fact they would be partial towards their clients, hypocritical towards potential clients, and horrible towards confirmed non-clients.
Now Mr Nozick is not an optimistic idiot who disbelieves this; the point is, these considerations do not count. But why not? What weight is there in the fact that we could, relative to certain wildly idealized psychological assumptions, reach the state without violating anyone’s rights? The motivation seems to be, that the (minimal) state will have been justified if it can be generated by steps each of which satisfies moral demands; and this is taken to mean that we can get there without anyone doing anything wrong. But how is this to be taken? The condition cannot be that we should be able to get there without anyone doing anything wrong at all, since it is a fact that some people sometimes do wrong which essentially contributes to our getting there and helps to power the invisible hand. By the same token, the condition cannot be that there is no wrong whose happening is essential to our getting there. So what exactly is it? How much wrong goes into the model, and where? Why cannot a sceptic resist the invisible-hand derivation, on the ground that its pictured working is too free of wrong to be plausible? As it stands, Mr Nozick seems—though I am not sure of this—to have settled for individuals in the model sometimes doing wrong, but associations not doing wrong; if that is correct, the model seems arbitrary. In any case, the derivation as it stands lacks any evident ground for being precisely as un-Hobbesian as it is.
Still less, of course, does it justify any existing state: for no state arose in this way, and it is Mr Nozick’s thought, certainly in his theory of justice, and I take it here, that how a state of affairs actually arose is crucial for its acceptability. This is the basic idea of his theory of justice as entitlement, and of his criticism of Rawls (and many other conceptions). A holding is just, on this view, if it has been acquired by a just process from a holding which is itself just: at the beginning is a notion of just acquisition (on which, as I have already said, Mr Nozick has notably little to say). Supplementary to the processes of just acquisition and just transfer are processes of rectification for situations which are unjust in one of these respects (holding, or transfer, or previous rectification): and that is all there is of the basic theory of justice.
Mr Nozick makes elegantly clear the difference between such a historical theory of just holdings, and an end-state theory, which concerns itself essentially with the pattern in which holdings end up, and seeks to adjust the pattern to some desired paradigm: Utilitarianism, and egalitarianism, and Rawls’s view are all end-state views. (There is a very nice demonstration that the State-of-Nature model which Rawls uses, that of the Original Position, is so designed that it could only yield an end-state conception of justice.) It will be clear how, at an ideal level of politics at least, Mr Nozick’s conception, as against end-state views, favours a strongly conservative outlook.
What are the intuitive merits of these ideas? There are questions, right at the beginning, about how to argue these issues. Mr Nozick’s basic method, throughout, is to take some everyday, non-political situation about which we are likely to agree, and apply our judgment in it to the larger issue of social principle—a method which, it might be argued, begs the question in his favour, since it presupposes his view that no new moral principles arise (should arise?) with the state. But even running the argument by his rules, his conception of justice does look like an enormous exaggeration of at best one aspect of our moral ideas. It is hard to know how far this is so, in fact, because, once more, we lack any theory of original entitlement. But suppose that, when the Mayflower arrived, some foresighted fellow, crouching by the gang-plank, jumped off and bagged a good area of what is now Massachusetts, before his companions, more cooperative, pious, idle, or enfeebled, got going; it looks as though Mr Nozick, if we assume there were no prior holders, would grant him just title. Do we agree? Would it be unjust to redistribute in favour of those others (even the idle)? Wasn’t it unfair of this man to take advantage of the fact that the others did not spend those crucial moments thinking about property rights? Would a certain fact about the end-result, namely that the nice guys came (nearly) last, have no effect at all on our estimate of the justice of this man’s holdings?
These are questions for Mr Nozick’s theory of justice (and its application to this case); but we can notice more broadly that, even if we eventually agreed that this pushy settler was not to be faulted in justice, that would only underline the point that we could hope that the Pilgrims, and ourselves, would have arrived with more virtues than justice. We are reminded again of that richer range of moral resources (of the kinds of character, for instance, that we want to have in society) which Mr Nozick’s treatment systematically leaves out.
There are other ideas and sentiments relevant to justice, which his treatment also passes over. What advantages, and their rewards, are candidates for redistribution is a real question, which egalitarians should face more honestly than they mostly do; but the fact that we should agree (most of us) with Mr Nozick that compulsory plastic surgery was no just reaction to inequalities in good looks, need not commit us all that quickly to agreeing with him on the evidently different matters of money and power. Again, and near the heart of Mr Nozick’s view, the very matter of distance (in time, over successive transfers, or whatever) does in fact affect the sentiments of many about injustice: the luck of the talented commands more respect, some find, than the luck of those who merely had a talented father. These are also “our” notions, in as good standing, at least, as those to which Mr Nozick appeals, and his conception of justice merely as a pipe for the rightful delivery of rights over any distance is not tested against enough notions to be really persuasive.
This is a book of a very highly theoretical character; indeed its theories themselves have a tendency to pursue the virtues of formal elegance rather than of concrete realism, as witnessed by the presence of much economic theory and virtually no psychology or sociology. This leaves the conclusions rather high in the air, particularly above present political realities. These views leave undetermined to a high degree what should now, in current political practice, be done—to a greater degree than most political theory, including Locke’s; they are in a deep sense Utopian, and the third element in the title is rightly juxtaposed with the others. This is not necessarily a failing: but it should be written in larger letters what the book does not offer. Above all, its theories do not, except in a very general and associative manner, offer any particular comfort to contemporary capitalism. For one thing, contemporary capitalism is a statist enterprise. For another, Mr Nozick’s derivation theory of justice does not imply that contemporary property holdings are just; on the contrary (though it is a matter of unrecoverable fact), it is 99 per cent probable that almost all of them are not. (Mr Nozick may well think that much of America rightfully belongs to Indians.) And in a vitally important but unemphatic passage (page 231) he makes it clear that redistribution by the state may well be, as things are, necessary for the rectification of past injustice. There is little comfort in these pages for contemporary friends of business; but Mr Nozick hardly makes it as clear as he might that this is so.
Within this abstract, complex, clever, and always stimulating, structure there is to be found, one suspects, a robust and romantically creative individualist outlook which, though undoubtedly tough, is in quite a different street from that of the friends of business’s nastier friends. But it will be partly Mr Nozick’s own fault if they, and their enemies, think otherwise.
Note
1. Anarchy, State, and Utopia, by Robert Nozick (Blackwell, 1974).
The Ethics of Fetal Research, by Paul Ramsey
There is a contrast between American and British life which applies not only to politics: while American practice is often harder, tougher and less inhibited than British, so are the protests and analyses that it elicits. Some frontier thought is at work, that before (or after) force all we have is argument, and that one cannot just rely on the rightness of what already exists. Questions of practical ethics take on an urgency, and a sense that something might actually turn on the results of an argument, which are lacking in our own fully saturated culture, with its depressing combination of complacency and dissatisfaction. It is one of several reasons why American philosophy is now a more stimulating, creative and high-class business than British philosophy.
The contrast shows itself in the domain of medical ethics—meaning by that, not the issues of professional propriety about sending in one’s bill and not sleeping with one’s patients, but such questions as abortion, euthanasia, experiments on patients, trust and deceit, and—not least—the institutional morality of medicine and the rights of doctors to make money. In some—not all—of these areas American practice has been less muffled by convention than in Britain (while in the matter of the cash nexus the American medical profession has famously displayed a degree of naked greed which would, at least till recently, have been found ungentlemanly in Britain).
Equally, analytical thought elicited by these questions has begun in America to take off in an energetic manner. It can bring with it, of course, a considerable investment in academic light industry—workshops, institutes, projects. Some of them have deeply suspect pretensions, particularly those which aspire, as some do, to cast the philosopher as ethical consultant, the intellectual chaplain of the terminal ward. Even if there is some coherent intellectual basis for drawing lines between the acceptable and the unacceptable experiment, between the permissible and the impermissible death—and whether there is such a basis at all is a real question—it is certain that the answers cannot be carried into the hospital in the form of the philosophical adviser. If philosophical reflection is to aid practice in such matters, the route will be less direct; but perhaps it would not need to be too long and hard, for all that, since one thing that is clear about these questions is that people need something coherent to believe about them, and any set of reflections that makes some sort of sense of them is likely to get a hearing.
Paul Ramsey is an American theologian who has written a lot on these matters; he is identified with a rather conservative, but not dogmatically extreme, set of positions on them. The Ethics of Fetal Research contains some reflection, some history, and some attempts at clarification, rather than any very strong conclusions, though conclusions can be heard not far off. Its subject is the limits of permissible research on the human foetus, whether in utero, or when separated from the mother, as for instance (but not necessarily) as a result of a decision to abort.1 It is the increase in legal abortion which has brought these problems to the fore. Among other possibilities, abortion can give rise to a foetus which is still living and which can temporarily be kept living, though it is not viable, i e, is not capable of independent life. Some valuable medical results, some of them concerned with the survival of foetuses, can be obtained by experiment on such foetuses, as also on the foetus in utero when it is intended to abort. (As usual, it is not easy to determine to what extent, and with what difficulty, the results might be obtained by other means.) The question arises of what limits should be imposed on research of this sort; and indeed there are questions about what medical uses can properly be made of dead foetuses which are the products of abortion—for instance, whether the mother’s consent has any standing in the case.
In Britain these matters are presently regulated by rules laid down by the Report of the Peel Committee which appeared in May 1972. This report defines a class of pre-viable foetuses; anything too old or too large to be included is, if living, to be regarded as viable, and can only be treated in ways compatible with promoting its survival. There are further restrictions about what can be done even in cases of pre-viability; thus the report rules as unethical any procedure administered to a pregnant woman designed to find out what harm it does to the foetus, even if there is an intention to abort and the woman has given her consent. This fairly conservative document seems, as Professor Ramsey says, to have closed the debate in Britain; in America, however, discussion is still growing, and there has been a series of directives and draft regulations of varying degrees of permissiveness.
There are some interesting questions here on which Professor Ramsey briefly touches, about how such rules should be laid down. In this country a respectable committee led by a well-known non-researching doctor evolved some extensions of established professional practice. In America, equally typically, there is more debate and open intervention by interested groups. But there is a systematic difficulty in all matters of this kind, which has not been discussed enough, about what exactly is a proper interest, in particular a proper moral concern, on the part of the public. Does public opinion have a right to be heard if it is upset about what is going on? Yes, it may be said, if it is informed (if it is not informed, it has a right to speak, of course, but not a right to be heard). But what counts as being informed? Certainly if people were shown on television some of the experiments carried out on foetuses, they would be very upset—but then they would be similarly upset, no doubt, if shown abortions. Here we have the site of the tension that has arisen about the publication of certain aspects of abortion: those opponents of abortion who publish these things are accused of sensationalism, to which they reply that they are showing people what abortion is.
And in saying that, they are not saying anything untrue. The trouble is that a spectator who lacks any context or preparation will not acquire any all-round view of what abortion is. But then where do you hold the line about an informed opinion on foetal research, short of saying that the only persons who have an all-round view of what foetal research is are foetal researchers and their medical colleagues? And with this public opinion disappears again from the scene.
Professor Ramsey comes back repeatedly to the relation between the abortion argument and the question of foetal research, and the central theme of his book is that these are two different issues. Not here discussing abortion itself, he wants to be able to resist those who say to the public: “Since you have already agreed to abortion—a gross, destructive assault on the foetus—it is just irrational to resist much less drastic procedures on it which moreover bring experimental benefits.” He does not aim to make any definitive case against the more drastic forms of foetal research; he does want to say that it is a separate issue from abortion.
He has raised an important and complex issue, and reveals a number of its complexities. It is a pity that, in what often looks like a hastily written book, he has not had greater success in unravelling the muddles. Those who use the tough and very plausible argument which Professor Ramsey confronts will not, I suspect, be moved away from it by this book, though they should be moved to look at the argument again. Professor Ramsey’s treatment is bedevilled by two separate confusions of his own making. The most important question here is: “If you believe that abortion (on social grounds, or at will) is permissible, are you committed thereby to thinking that unrestricted experiment on foetuses (or at least voluntarily aborted foetuses) is permissible?” This question Professor Ramsey fails to concentrate on adequately because he allows himself to be distracted by a different question, which is whether the mere fact that abortion is widely accepted commits us to thinking foetal experimentation is permissible; here the answer is “no”, and Professor Ramsey spends time berating adversaries who (he claims) think two wrongs make a right, rather than directly discussing the question whether either could be wrong if the other were not.
Secondly, in so far as he does take on that question, he tends to take on only a small part of it, making the point that there are moral issues about foetal research which arise even outside voluntary abortion, as for instance with miscarried foetuses. This of course is true, but it still does not answer the main question.
Although Professor Ramsey says that there are two issues, in fact the way he discusses foetal research strongly suggests that, in his view, the desirable restrictions on it properly imply restrictions on abortion. His favoured analogies for the foetus under research are the dying, and—for those not yet, but about to be, aborted—the condemned. Such analogies press very hard on the question of by what right these human beings have been killed or condemned, and it is surely impossible to accept straightforwardly these analogies without more discussion than Professor Ramsey permits himself here of their relation to the abortion issue.
Although Professor Ramsey has not really succeeded in separating these two issues, he may well be right in believing that they can and should be, to some degree, separated. None of the received ways of thinking about these things makes it easy to separate them: neither the Utilitarian way, which makes it all a matter of benefits to mankind, nor the classificatory way, which makes it all a matter of what kind of thing a foetus is. But we have no reason at all to believe that our received ways of thinking about these things are at all adequate to them; we have to invent ways of dealing with them which will fit as honestly as possible with what we know about human nature, what we hope for it, and what we care about in it. Though that is not quite Professor Ramsey’s way of looking at these problems, and though here he seems not to have got things into the order that even he himself wants, his book displays a certain tart humanism and dislike of cant which help to remind us that everything we invent has got to give us not only ways of thinking coherently about these matters, but ways of feeling coherently about them.
Note
1. The Ethics of Fetal Research, by Paul Ramsey (Yale University Press, 1975).
The Moral View of Politics
Twenty years ago, the prevailing view in English-speaking philosophical circles was that political philosophy would never flourish again. Now by contrast, the subject is very active, the predicted funeral seems to have been indefinitely postponed, and the sources of this new life are largely to be found in the United States of America.
The moribund condition of political philosophy at that time was due to more than one cause. Some of the causes were internal to the state of philosophy itself; in particular, there was a prevailing theory that statements of value were sharply to be separated from statements of fact or theory, and, in addition, philosophy chastely refused to come out with statements of value. Living political philosophy, moreover, needs a context of political urgency, and the decline of political philosophy in the Fifties and early Sixties was, to that extent, a phenomenon of a period of political stagnation, one which prematurely saluted the end of ideology.
The situation has now changed in all these respects. The harsh theoretical disjunction between fact and value has been modified; the reluctance of philosophers to come out with normative statements is much less apparent; and the political context itself has also changed.
There has been a real revival in political philosophy, and this has been particularly conspicuous in the USA, where the revival of serious political conflict in the later Sixties has, in a traditional manner, helped to revive philosophical political thought. Three sorts of issue in particular contributed to this. The Vietnam war raised questions about the rights and wrongs of warfare; and not only the idea of a just or unjust war, but those very phrases (moving out of the Catholic tradition) came to play an important part in controversy. Because many students faced or feared they would face the draft, the war presented, in a very urgent form, questions about the right of the state to demand service, the duty to obey, and the right to individual conscientious objection: and the rights, equally, to protest by civil disobedience. All of this constituted what might be called the area of rights and allegiance. Second, there is an area of social justice: the application of reflective philosophical theory to moral and social issues presented by the injustices of Western society, assertion of which, in the late 1960s, unsettled conservative belief that those injustices had gone away, and liberal faith that they gradually would do so. This is an area which has produced the outstanding single work of political philosophy since the war, John Rawls’s A Theory of Justice—a work on which Rawls had been working for a long time before recent political developments, though it is by no means unmarked by them. Third, among several other kinds of active social influence, one should mention, in particular, conservationist anxieties, and also the women’s movement, which has given rise to a particularly active philosophical debate about abortion. Both of these influences bear on population policy, and this, in turn, relates back to the issues of social justice; conservation affects future generations, and questions arise about how to think about justice between generations: particularly when, as under policies of population control, the question of what the future generations will be is, in some part, itself a matter of social decision.
In speaking of the impact of these events on philosophy, I have in mind what, in a broad sense, may be called analytical philosophy—philosophy which, while not committed to the restrictive conceptions current in the 1950s, nevertheless shares with them a belief in analytical methods and a discursively argumentative tone. Rawls’s book is in this style, and so is another striking book which I shall come back to, Robert Nozick’s Anarchy, State, and Utopia. It is also the prevailing style of a journal which has succeeded, for several years now, in discussing at a high level a wide range of these problems, a journal called Philosophy and Public Affairs.
This broadly analytical type of philosophical work is intellectually important, interesting in its relation to the development of philosophy, and is certainly influential on public and student opinion, through publications and the work of individual teachers. But a more dramatic influence, it must be said, was shown in the late 1960s by a different style of thought in social philosophy—the kind of post-Marxist critique pursued, to particular, by members of the Frankfurt school who were transplanted to the USA in the 1930s; work which came to much wider and more excitable public notice in the form of Marcuse’s writings, particularly One-Dimensional Man. Some effects of this type of work, and of the events of which it became part, have certainly remained; but the interest in this style of philosophical writing has somewhat receded with the radical movements which it helped to inspire.
One of several ways in which the work of Rawls and Nozick differs from this kind of work is that their values are overwhelmingly of an individual and moral character; the attitudes appropriate to society are seen as extensions of individual moral conviction, and this approach takes, moreover, a rather startlingly pure, non-historical, and unsociological view of the nature of moral conviction, and the role of moral conviction in the determination of what happens in society. In this regard, the works of Rawls and of Nozick are strikingly alike, though they radically disagree in their conclusions.
Rawls’s book, A Theory of Justice, is an elaborate work, which shows very clearly the effects of many years’ discussion and revision. It offers a theory of social justice which is grounded in the moral notion of fairness; its argument proceeds, for a great deal of the book, by working out the consequences of a certain thought-experiment. We are to imagine a set of persons from whom the actual world, their historical and social position in it and their own personal characteristics, are hidden by what Rawls calls a ‘veil of ignorance’. This state of affairs is called the Original Position; in the Original Position, these persons know no particular facts, but do know the general laws of economics and of the social sciences. (It is an interesting reflection on Rawls’s basically Enlightenment outlook, that he assumes that there are such laws which, in principle, can be understood independently of particular facts of history.) In the Original Position, people are to choose a social system for themselves and for their families, and the argument turns on what principles they would rationally employ in doing that. Rawls argues that they would reject Utilitarian principles—for instance, a principle of the highest average welfare: for, after all, when the veil of ignorance was lifted, they might turn out to be among the least advantaged persons in the system, and a high average welfare in that system could still leave them very badly off indeed. Eventually, Rawls argues, they will rationally go for what he calls the Difference Principle, which says (very roughly) that if there are to be departures from equality in welfare, then those departures must be in the interests of the worst-off group.
There has been, and will continue to be, much argument about how Rawls runs his thought-experiment: whether any choice can be made under this degree of ignorance. But the most basic question concerns the force of the thought-experiment itself. Even if a determinate conclusion could be reached about what would be rationally chosen in the Original Position, what would that signify? Well, the answer to this is that it imports a moral conclusion—the self-interested preferences of these abstract agents (insofar as they still have a self) are supposed to be a model for the moral and impartial preferences of actual agents, what actual agents would choose if they were choosing disinterestedly. The basic idea is the very simple one that a fair division of a cake is one you would make if you were selfish but knew nothing about which piece you would get yourself. It is, thus, an approach to social justice which appeals to, and has to be checked against, our moral sentiments. These sentiments, which Rawls standardly calls moral ‘intuitions’, are supposed to be elicited from us rather as the knowledge of our language is: as a linguistic theorist relies on the intuitions of a native speaker about what is an acceptable sentence of his language, so we try out the consequences of moral and social theory on our moral intuitions, and seek to achieve what Rawls calls a ‘reflective equilibrium’ between intuition and theory.
But there is a weakness in this analogy, and in the method it supposedly supports. It is not so much that Rawls is totally resistant to any kind of relativism, though it is notable how utterly untouched his work is by the kind of relativist anxieties which haunt all social philosophy which grows out of sociology and social anthropology, anxieties which surely express, however confusedly, some proper reflexive doubt about whether our current moral priorities can be universally applied. The trouble is, rather more basically, that there is no adequate analogy in the linguistic case for the situation of conflict and disharmony in our moral sentiments, where, necessarily, it matters to us in practice how the conflict is resolved. The relation of such conflicts to moral theory, in Rawls’s sense, is unclear, and the analogy to linguistics which Rawls uses does not really help us to understand it. The moral theory contains consistent and maximally general moral principles, and they, by fitting our intuitions about a large number of cases where there is no conflict, are supposed to acquire the authority to solve the cases where there is a conflict. But how do they acquire this authority?
Here again, the lack of an empirical dimension to Rawls’s thought shows itself. The fact is that we understand too much, in historical and social terms, about the origins of our moral sentiments and about the origins of our conflicts, for us to be able to accept the purely Kantian idea that an abstract structure of principles should, by its harmony and generality, and its ability to fit many of our sentiments, command our allegiance with regard to the sentiments which we are less sure about, and the conflicts in our moral thought which we actually experience.
Now, Rawls’s theory of justice is one which regards justice as a property of outcomes or distributions—you look at the whole pattern of distribution to see whether each person’s holding is a just holding. In this respect, Rawls’s own view is like many other views whose principles are to be rejected in the Original Position, views such as Utilitarianism; they have in common that they all regard justice as a property of the outcome. Robert Nozick, in his book, distinguishes all such theories from what he calls an entitlement theory of justice, where the central question in considering whether someone justly holds something is not what everyone else holds, but how this man came by what he holds; if he justly acquired it from someone who justly held it, then he justly holds it. It is not the resultant pattern, but the legitimacy of each transaction in itself, which should be looked at. Ferociously conservative conclusions can, of course, be drawn from this conception of justice, conclusions opposed to all redistributive mechanisms; and Nozick draws such conclusions, with a good deal of intellectual ingenuity and a certain enthusiasm for upsetting bien-pensant liberals.
Nozick’s theory of justice is only the second part of a book which first discusses—in utterly abstract terms, which make plentiful reference to Locke—the question whether the state is justified at all, and concludes that it is justified, but only in a minimal, nightwatchman form. Taxation, for instance, is regarded as a species of forced labour. What emerges in theory is a utopia which roots itself in an American tradition of libertarian anarchism. What would emerge, in fact, if these ideas gained popularity in the late 20th century, is certainly another matter, and, indeed, Nozick’s relation to contemporary right-wing defenders of capitalism is ambivalent. He is committed to opposing them, both because modern capitalism is essentially statist, and also because holdings in contemporary America are quite certainly, by Nozick’s own standards, unjust (a lot of it was originally stolen from Indians); but his denunciations of redistribution through taxation sound louder than any such considerations. He runs the risk of doing the same as many Goldwaterites, of heading nostalgically for an Old West state of nature, but doing it in a Cadillac.
But, in principle, both his and Rawls’s views are radical: Rawls’s because the Difference Principle is radically redistributive, Nozick’s because it would be a radical change that got us away from redistribution. Rawls and Nozick are quite different in their views of justice, their understanding of the state, and the virtues they salute. But they have much in common. They both approach political philosophy from moral perceptions recovered in intuition (of which Nozick makes much the same use as Rawls does, but he takes and works into theory a different and a narrower range of intuitions). They both regard the enterprise of thinking philosophically about society in abstraction from history or concrete social conditions; and, connectedly, the social sciences they use, Nozick even more than Rawls, are economics and decision theory, both of which can be pursued at a high level of abstraction.
Falling back on such moral perceptions as you have, and starting from there; supposing that social principles can be elaborated independently of a determinate historical starting-point: these were conceptions of the Founding Fathers and, again, of the frontier situation, and it is not fanciful to see the willingness to start from historical scratch as an American disposition which, explicitly in Nozick but effectively in both these writers, conditions their works, and, indeed, lies behind the vigour with which a range of writers have been willing to tackle the questions of social principle which I mentioned earlier. In all of them, there is an approach from individual morality, combined with a readiness to school it to theory and to accept new consequences. An important contribution to this activity is undoubtedly made also by that respect for general theory which is now a very widespread and invigorating feature of American philosophy, as opposed to the piecemeal methods which were the ideal of British philosophy in the Fifties, and which did have, at that time, great influence in America.
While this work in political philosophy is often valuable and exciting, it does sit oddly to present discontents. It does seem rather late in the day to come so directly to politics from purely moral conceptions—though reasons for the vigour of this moral reaffirmation can themselves be found in recent American history. It is hard, again, to accept a political philosophy which does not start rather more determinately from the highly elaborated, and very densely occupied, social and political scene we actually have. Where the frontier was is now Cleveland or St Louis, and a situation in which we could really make a new start would be one in which alarmingly little would have to be left. People who were in that situation might not find themselves with just those moral responses on which these philosophers, in their different ways, markedly rely.
I have concentrated on American developments, and, in particular, on the work of Rawls and Nozick, because these seem at present to be the most strikingly original and influential developments in a field which shows signs of continuing to develop more broadly. Two kinds of development beyond the limits of their work are, I think, to be hoped for. One is that there should be work which is more closely based on the current historical situation and, correspondingly, grounded in a closer relation to the social sciences. Another possible development, a desirable one, is that the methods and standards of analytical philosophy should come closer to those concerns which have animated neo-Marxist and neo-Hegelian critics of our society, concerns which have, so far, been expressed in more archaic philosophical forms. Both possible developments have a requirement in common: that historical understanding should be brought into the picture in a way in which it conspicuously fails to be in the work that I have been discussing.
The Life of Bertrand Russell, by Ronald W. Clark; The Tamarisk Tree: My Quest for Liberty and Love, by Dora Russell; My Father Bertrand Russell, by Katharine Tait; Bertrand Russell, by A. J. Ayer
Bertrand Russell’s Autobiography (which was published in three volumes in the 1960s) is a work that leaves one in more than one way winded. It is not altogether a book, bringing together a rather random collection of letters with a sketchy account of the author’s life which, though sometimes alarmingly frank, omits much and hurries the reader on from one cursorily described event to another. It is not just the speed of travel that leaves one gasping, but the glancing view of some episodes that Russell puts in. One is several times confronted with a summary or dismissive account of central, professedly transforming, occurrences in his life, which cannot, surely, represent things as they were then lived, yet at the same time is not just the misleading product of a distant or oblique style of recollection.
There is no recognizable economy of narration which explains the effect produced by the Autobiography. The spiritual transitions which flash by, which are enacted between the striking of a match and the puffing of that ubiquitous pipe, do not seem as blank and unreal as they do because the structural outlines are left on the horizon, the emotional materials having burned or wasted away. On the contrary, it is the language of intense and overwhelming feeling, for a person or for the sufferings of mankind, that itself lights up these Polaroid snaps of Russell’s past and leaves the reader with a problem about how Russell could possibly have understood himself, either when he wrote these pages or when what he wrote about occurred. The most famous, now notorious, case is his account of his deciding on a bicycle ride that he no longer loved his first wife, Alys, and pedaling back to live for years in accordance with that discovery. But there are many other passages in which references to extreme or drastic resolution leave the reader bewilderingly distant from any conception of Russell’s self-understanding.
Mr. Clark’s long biography does much to help us on questions of fact, to fill in holes in the story, and to correct some impressions left by Russell’s account.1 For one thing, his affair with Connie Malleson (“Colette”) went on longer, and had more echoes in Russell’s later life, than you would judge from the Autobiography. Clark has taken great pains with an enormous amount of material, Russell’s widow having given him full access to documents. He makes a number of new discoveries and suggestions, very plausibly proposing in particular that the object of a passion in Russell’s earlier life, whose identity he concealed, was in fact Mrs. Alfred North Whitehead. He is good, also, at sorting out more recent events, and gives a very reasonable account of Russell’s involvement in the Committee of 100 against nuclear weapons, and his eventual quarrel with Ralph Schoenman.
The amount of work that has gone into producing this well-documented and clearly signposted account of Russell’s life is not to be underestimated. But one cannot pretend that it is an illuminating or even a deeply enjoyable read. It has the property of large books sold at airports: the author judges that he has his reader for a long while if he neither lets him sleep nor makes him work, so that the style is by turns undemandingly bland and stridently chummy. “Bertie … was therefore denied the tempering ordeal of a public school and consigned to a mixed bag of governesses and tutors,” he cheerily says near the beginning, and the tone is not untypical. Several reviewers have remarked that the style seems to get less embarrassing as the book goes on, and this is true, but it is hard to know whether the reason is that Clark is more used to his subject, we are more used to Clark, or Clark finds the events of Russell’s later life easier to deal with.
One reason might be that Russell’s contributions to philosophy in his later life were less fundamental, both to the subject and to Russell’s view of himself. Clark’s occasional dealings with Russell’s philosophy are unsuccessful, and indeed it is not easy to guess what he takes himself to be doing. Many of his brief accounts of Russell’s philosophical work can be read in more than one way, and one of those ways is usually not totally wrong; but it seems rash to suppose that that will be the one to occur to a reader who benefits from being told, as Clark tells him, that Leibniz was “Voltaire’s Dr. Pangloss, the German polymath who had waltzed through the second half of the seventeenth century as philosopher, scientist, mathematician and diplomat.” A basic weakness of such accounts is that they do not rest on knowledge of other philosophy; one reason why Clark makes a mess of the admittedly hard task of explaining what Russell’s most famous logical article, “On Denoting,” is about is that he is not familiar with Frege’s treatment of the issues, from which Russell started. Clark falls back on identifying the main point of the article with its most prominent joke.
It is a pity that Clark has not got a better sense of Russell’s major work; for one thing, it means that Russell’s relations to others who affected him in that work, above all Wittgenstein, are very vaguely characterized—these geniuses engaged in deep and difficult subjects are presented as grand and quaint, like great physicists in a TV documentary. But Russell’s major contributions were to very technical and abstract branches of philosophy and logic, and it is unreasonable to hope that his biographer will be an expert in those subjects.
Even A. J. Ayer’s book, which gives a marvelously clear and of course utterly professional account of some of Russell’s central ideas in philosophy, does not take on the hard task that lies beyond the recognition that Russell made a great contribution to the philosophy of logic: the task, that is to say, of assessing exactly how much difference Russell’s work made to the development of modern work in the foundations of mathematics. Clark does best with Russell’s more popular writings on ethical and social subjects—a department in which Ayer, for his part, mostly contents himself with a brief account of Russell’s not very interesting theoretical opinions in moral philosophy, accompanied by some bleak tutorial comment on them.2
What is more unsettling than Clark’s dealings with Russell’s central philosophical work is his uncertainty of taste in assessing Russell’s rhetoric. A Free Man’s Worship is described as “a short but profoundly moving cry of defiance against the human predicament, couched in terms of romantic disillusion”; but it is not only a dated but also a hollow piece of oratory, and Clark’s acceptance of it at its face value shows a lack of curiosity. Russell himself was later, in his more Voltairean period, to have doubts about its style, but the weakness of its costless heroics against cosmic indifference went deeper and further than he recognized. There is an absurdity in Russell’s resentment at the universe’s failure to live up to man’s expectations, a resentment which seems an extension of his annoyance at mankind’s not living up to him. “I am ashamed to belong to such a species,” he wrote in 1916.
There is a fascinating page in volume two of the Autobiography dealing with that period, where, writing of making love to Connie Malleson during a Zeppelin raid, he describes sentiments about the war which he felt intensely at that moment, sentiments which show up as not totally free either of easy heroics or of contempt for the idiot mob. This love for humanity, coupled with a dismissive hatred of many of its deepest characteristics, is typical of Russell and is obscure enough to blur the picture of his love for a particular person, which he insists on bringing together with those general feelings. Of his relation to Connie Malleson, he said that it was “never trivial and never unworthy to be placed alongside of the great public emotions connected with the War.” But where exactly does that place it?
Often, Russell writes of feelings as though they were unmeasurably overwhelming, and yet as though, in the next minute, he had quite straightforwardly got their measure. This phenomenon, so bewildering in the Autobiography, turns up in several curious passages quoted by Clark. Writing to Ottoline Morrell, Russell speaks of what he called his “first conversion,” in the presence of a woman who Clark has given us reason to believe was Mrs. Whitehead:
I came to know suddenly (what it was not intended I should know) that a woman whom I liked greatly had a life of utter loneliness, filled with intense tragedy & pain of which she could never speak. I was not free to tell my sympathy, which was so intense as to change my life. I turned to all the ways there might be of alleviating her trouble without seeming to know it & so I went on in thought to loneliness in general, & how only love bridges the chasm—how force is the evil thing, & strife is the root of all evil & gentleness the only balm. I became infinitely gentle for a time. I turned against the S. African war & imperialism (I was an imperialist till then) & I found that I loved children & they loved me. I resolved to bring some good & some hope into her life. All this happened in about five minutes.
Certainly thoughts relating to each of those things could intensely pass in five minutes. Perhaps one could even end up after five minutes in those states (though the discovery about children seems a bit ambitious). But certainly no grown-up person should write in retrospect as though a five-minute sequence of intense emotion was itself the entire enactment of all those life-transforming changes; any more than one expects him to be able to write, in all solemnity, of a different time:
That was the only time when I completely lost faith in myself & thought of myself as a mere cumberer of the earth. I resolved to commit suicide as soon as I could get rid of certain definite obligations which for the moment made it impossible.
It was not just Russell’s feelings, but the fact that he had feelings, that excited him, and this certainly contributed to the now well-known emergencies of his sexual life. Clark gives some idea of the different significance to Russell of different relationships, though he tends to adopt a rather breezy and knowing tone about some of it, and he leaves us outside the complexities and strangenesses of Russell’s relations to Ottoline Morrell. Some of Russell’s reactions, particularly in self-justification, are certainly surprising—sometimes it is hard to gather even what he thought he was saying. When he had just had a brief affair in America with the unfortunate Helen Dudley (who later followed him at his suggestion to England, but proved boringly unequal to Russell’s feelings about the war), he wrote to Ottoline, with whom he was still intensely involved:
I do not want you to think that this will make the very smallest difference in my feeling towards you, beyond removing the irritation of unsatisfied instinct. I suppose it must give you some pain, but I hope not very much if I can make you believe it is all right & that she is not the usual type of American. The whole family are extraordinarily nice people….
But it must be said that he was able to extract strikingly long-lasting devotion from others: Alys, a pathetic figure in Clark’s representation, still in love with him, apparently, until her death; Colette (who seems to have been marvelous) sending him red roses on his ninety-seventh birthday. And the autobiography of Dora, his second wife, though it sturdily sets out to live up to the self-reliant promise of its subtitle, in fact is a tribute to the power that Russell’s presence had in forming her life.3 In her book there is an implied, as well as a stated, acknowledgment of the sense of life that he obviously could, while he was still interested, convey. After he and Dora split up and he left the school they had started together, there were unceasing squabbles and pieces of litigation. While Dora Russell tells something of this tale, it lacks any great force of recrimination or self-justification or anything else—she seems to have lost interest. The pages of this book which stand out as vivid are those about their time in China together just before their marriage, when Russell was exceptionally happy.
Russell has been called a skeptic, and there is indeed a biography of him by Alan Wood (Simon & Schuster, 1958) subtitled “The Passionate Sceptic.” Skepticism is concerned with the withholding of assent, the sustaining of a state of intellectual suspense; it is very hard to find any strain of real skepticism in Russell, as opposed to an occasional judicious tone of voice and an advocacy of the virtues of benevolent reasonableness. His opinions were often dogmatic, simple, emphatically expressed, and poorly supported by evidence. They were said to be skeptical merely because they were antireligious and unpopular; perhaps also he seemed a skeptic because he appeared to want to believe some of the things he denied, and made it seem such a heroic feat not to deny that the world is as it is.
In his technical philosophy he was not a skeptic but, after his first years, an empiricist, and the main guiding thread to his development is his attachment to empiricist principles and habits of thought. As in the empiricist tradition, his philosophy of language is always closely allied to the theory of knowledge. It is impossible to give an account of his logico-linguistic treatment of particular terms and definite descriptions that does not also involve his conception of knowledge by acquaintance, of what can be grasped with certainty. A. J. Ayer gives a very clear account of how this works, but (no doubt because his own sympathies lie close to Russell’s) he does not bring it into such strong relief, or contrast it with contemporary alternatives, as D. F. Pears does in his book Bertrand Russell and the British Tradition in Philosophy (Random House, 1967). Related to that empiricist strain, but sometimes conflicting with its more radical demands, was Russell’s attempt to make his philosophy cohere with what he conceived to be the general findings of the natural sciences—something which brought him back to a causal theory of perception from the more Humean type of position which he occupied in the Analysis of Mind.
This element of respect for the sciences in Russell’s work might well prove more sympathetic to philosophers now than it has in the past twenty-five years, when Wittgensteinian attitudes represented any tendency of philosophy to be shaped by the natural sciences—and still more any attempt by philosophy to emulate them in method—as a basic indecency. A revaluation of Russell’s theories of knowledge and their associated metaphysics will need a less squeamish temper. It will also need a certain relaxation of the insistence, particularly inherited from G. E. Moore, on the virtues of literal accuracy, which Russell, always a swift and careless writer, treated with some disdain.
The time has come for that revaluation, and there is room for doubt about what will emerge: whether Russell has been seriously undervalued in these areas (as opposed to the philosophy of logic, where his reputation is assured), or whether it is true, as many philosophers would say, that the larger bulk of Russell’s philosophy is unfruitfully archaic. Unlike Moore and, above all, Wittgenstein, Russell was largely free of real worries, so characteristic of twentieth-century thought, about what philosophy is or could be. I think he regarded freedom from these reflexive worries as a mark of vitality, but it may prove to have been a kind of obstinacy which, together with his facility, led him to run up philosophical theories of just the kind that no longer have anything to offer. If Russell’s epistemological work does prove, on the other hand, to retain real interest, then it will have been a triumph, in a certain sense, of his naiveté as against the self-consciousness of his contemporaries.
In practical life, politics, and social opinion Russell was yet further removed from skepticism than in his formal philosophy. That moderation of assertion which is supposed to characterize the skeptic he used more as a rhetorical device than in a discipline of self-criticism, and the temptations of indignant emphasis often seduced him. Sometimes his published opinions were the victims of a haste imposed on him by the heavy journalistic routine which he sustained to keep himself and his family—Clark has a good quotation from a letter to Stanley Unwin:
It has been drawn to my attention that on page 209 of “Marriage and Morals” I say “It seems on the whole fair to regard negroes as on the average inferior to white men.” I wish in any future reprint to substitute for the words: “It seems on the whole fair,” the words “There is no sound reason.”
For a man who often insisted that practice should be guided by thought, and thought controlled by evidence, his enthusiasm for acting, and advocating action, on the basis of some flimsy bright idea was remarkable. It lay behind his advocacy of a preventive war against the USSR in the late 1940s, an episode particularly carefully investigated by Clark.
In a way that was, in its effects on other people, more painful, an amazing confidence of this kind seems to have attended the experiment of a progressive school at Beacon Hill which he and Dora undertook. Their daughter Katharine was one of the pupils, and her touching and unpretentious book gives a very real if avowedly subjective view of what it was like.4 Though he could also be great fun, theory in the form of some dire amalgam of Rousseau, Pavlov, and the Puritan conscience seems to have filled the judicious philosopher with an alarming degree of conviction, both in the general conduct of the school (which not altogether surprisingly came to bore him), and in his dealings with his own children. Mrs. Tait tells of a small, but to me chilling, episode when her brother John as a small boy had to stagger on a long climb from the beach with a rock which he wanted to keep and which was too heavy for him, having been told on clear and reasonable grounds of principle that he could keep it if and only if he carried it home by himself.
Whether it was enthusiasm for a new libertarian yet disciplined world, or political indignation, or sexual passion, or pantheistic surges, there emerges the impression that Russell was so relieved that he had powerful feelings that he was only too happy to take them at their face value. His theoretical philosophy, moreover, offered not much value to such feelings beyond their face. He made a harsh disjunction of reason and feeling, and held a simply deductive or instrumental view of reason. Such views offered him little space in which to understand feeling critically, or to deepen or enrich it. “He was especially prone to accept Hume’s theory that the emotions are detached, because he himself exemplified it,” as David Pears has said in his admirable review of Clark (The New Review, London, December 1975). If feelings did not mean what, at the reviving moment of their onrush, they seemed to mean, then perhaps they meant nothing at all; and if they meant nothing, then nothing meant anything. In this inability to detach the significance of feeling from its immediate aspect, there is something adolescent. D. H. Lawrence, who said a lot of silly things about Russell, and in some ways got the worst, from Russell’s well-known memoir, of their inevitable quarrel, nevertheless was centrally and deadly right when he wrote to Ottoline Morrell of Russell, then aged forty-three:
he is vitally, emotionally, much too inexperienced in personal contact and conflict, for a man of his age and calibre. It isn’t that life has been too much for him, but too little. Tell him he is not to write lachrymose letters to me of disillusion and disappointment and age; that sounds like nineteen.
This lack of a real relation to his feelings, his attachment to their surface meaning, shakes confidence in Russell. We cannot take him as a touchstone of things, and when he is presented, as he occasionally was by himself and more frequently by others, as the channel of reason or humanity or human dignity, there is reason for distrust. It is not as a selfless embodiment of rational principle that he is to be seen, nor is he one of those figures who divine, transmit, and shape feelings which are shared by others but elude those others’ formulation. Even in his stand against nuclear warfare, though it was important and impressive and admirable that he stood where he did and extended an emblem of reason against what is offered as rationality by technocrats and politicians, he did not gain his dignity in this by having any deeper understanding of things than they, or a more insightful conception of reason. He just obstinately, and valuably, placed himself where he did because that is how he then felt.
Even in this case, and still more obviously elsewhere in his life, it is not moral penetration that gives Russell’s life its extraordinary quality, nor is it understanding, whether of himself or of anyone else. It is his will, in the purest sense of willfulness. His embodiment of the aristocratic characteristics he was aware of in his conception of human excellence—“fearlessness, independence of judgment, emancipation from the herd, leisurely culture”; the sheer arbitrariness of his choice, on a considerable scale, to do what he wanted—these, together with his philosophical achievements, actually carry greater authority than his reasons for the social ideals he was always preaching, or the powerful cosmic and personal passions which so impressed him.
Notes
1. The Life of Bertrand Russell, by Ronald W. Clark (Knopf, 1975).
2. Bertrand Russell, by A. J. Ayer (Viking, 1972).
3. The Tamarisk Tree: My Quest for Liberty and Love, by Dora Russell (Putnam’s, 1975).
4. My Father Bertrand Russell, by Katharine Tait (Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1975).
Reflections on Language, by Noam Chomsky; On Noam Chomsky: Critical Essays, edited by Gilbert Harman
Since the publication of Syntactic Structures nineteen years ago the general shape of Chomsky’s position in linguistic theory has become familiar. The subject, as he conceives it, is a branch of cognitive psychology; its basic problem is posed by the human capacity to acquire a natural language, something which Chomsky has insisted we should see as remarkable, with regard both to what the child experiences and to what he acquires. What he acquires is an indefinitely extensive creative capacity to produce and to understand an open-ended set of sentences that he has never heard before. What he is offered by his elders (or rather from them, since Chomsky thinks little importance can be attached to directed language teaching) is evidence, as he has put it, “not only meager in scope, but degenerate in quality.” The actual performances the child is exposed to are fragmented and distorted relative to his recognition, apparent in the competence he acquires, of what would be an acceptable sentence of his language.
To explain the gross disproportion between what is acquired (in the form of competence) and what is experienced (in the form of speech) we need to posit a strongly constrained, internal, innate mechanism which, when triggered by the experience of speech, builds a cognitive structure, a grammar of the language, within limits set by very specialized schemata. Any human child, moreover, can learn naturally any human language, so the schemata must be universal, and when Chomsky refers to the properties of the innate mechanism, he often indicates that each of us possesses, indeed knows, the principles of a universal grammar. His model, though cognitive, is also biological, and in the present book, which consists of three lectures given in 1975, together with a long paper which is a revision of one submitted for a Festschrift, he particularly favors an embryological analogy, in which development of language is compared to the genetically controlled development of an animal.1
As Chomsky has tirelessly pointed out to his critics, the mere idea of an innate component in learning a language is undisputed and uninteresting: the blankest theory of behaviorism requires some innate mechanism, however minimal. The important question concerns how complex and how specific to language acquisition the mechanism is supposed to be. In particular, Chomsky has differed from the empiricist tradition in regarding the mechanism as not simply one that applies a general learning strategy to language. Discussion over the past years, however, has made it clear that this particular difference between Chomsky and the empiricists is ambiguous, and some recognition of the ambiguity can be traced in the present book.
A “general learning capacity” might be defined in terms of some very simple learning theory, such as the traditional empiricist theories of “association” or of “inductive” generalization. In this sense, Chomsky convincingly insists that no one has offered a plausible or even coherent way of representing the learning of language by such empiricist learning theories. But it might also be true that very little that is learned can be represented in these simple empiricist terms: maybe most learning requires innate mechanisms more complex, and with more defined limits, than empiricism traditionally has allowed. If this is so, then the important question for language concerns how specific the capacity for language acquisition is, not the extent to which it is, peculiarly, innate.
The general issue is to some degree, but only to some, independent of what exactly the principles of the grammar of a human language have to be. Chomsky has retained, of course, his original picture of grammatical rules as being “generative.” They include transformational rules which turn abstract “deep structures” into “surface structures.” These surface structures take on a particular phonological form and emerge as the sentences one actually hears.
But many other more particular aspects of the theory have changed over the years. Above all on the matter of the relations between syntax (how and why a sentence is well formed or, in most everyday senses, “grammatical”) and semantics (what a sentence means, what it refers to, what has to obtain for it to be true), Chomsky has abandoned the “standard” theory of Aspects of the Theory of Syntax (1965), by which semantic interpretation was applied to deep structure. He now applies semantic interpretation to surface structure, a notable modification of his earlier views. On a verbal matter, Chomsky in these pages proposes giving up the well-known phrase “deep structure” for those initial abstract base sentences to which the transformations are applied. His grounds for doing so are revealing of what he cares most about. He argues that not only these base sentences, but processes applied at the level of surface structure as well, are “deep” in the only interesting sense—namely, expressive of important and hidden human powers.
On the questions of the relations of syntax and semantics, many other positions are possible and have been vigorously discussed. Some expressions of these disagreements about the place of semantics in transformational grammar are to be found in some of the papers collected in the book edited by Gilbert Harman;2 other papers take the discussion further, into questions about how semantics in general is to be understood and pursued—by using a theory of truth, for instance, as proposed by Donald Davidson, or by certain abstract structures of “possible worlds,” advocated here by David Lewis. It is exceptionally difficult for someone like myself, who is not engaged full-time in the technical literature of these subjects (difficult, also, I suspect, for those who are), to have any full sense of how these various approaches relate to one another and to generative grammar, or to understand how far these and other semantic theories exclude one another, or are rather dealing in complementary questions.
Harman’s collection, though it contains much good material, is not going to help anyone with this problem. His introduction is useful as far as it goes, but it does not go nearly far enough; and while the book is called On Noam Chomsky, in the case of one or two papers it would take someone with a sophisticated understanding of the subject to grasp why the matters discussed bear on issues raised by Chomsky at all.
Even when proposals about the nature of semantics are explicitly related to Chomsky, the size, weight, and exact location of disagreement can remain obscure. Harman valuably reprints John Searle’s admirable piece “Chomsky’s Revolution in Linguistics,” which appeared in this journal in 1972. In it Searle criticizes Chomsky for not associating semantic study with the notion of communicative intention; he urges his own and Grice’s theories of speech-acts, which link the meaning of the sentence to the intentions of the speaker, to fill what he sees as a void in the Chomskyan system—the point of language. Chomsky, in the present book, replies to Searle, but chiefly to deny, once more, the necessity of communicative intent, and to insist that uses of language can be thoroughly and seriously meant though not intended to influence any hearer.
As a graduate student, I spent two years writing a lengthy manuscript, assuming throughout that it would never be published or read by anyone. I meant everything I wrote, intending nothing as to what anyone would believe about my beliefs, in fact taking it for granted that there would be no audience.
But how could the existence of such cases possibly be the main issue? One would like to know whether, if what Searle says about the connections of meaning and intention were true, much or any of Chomsky’s views would be upset. It might be true that, despite exceptions, language is primarily or centrally connected with intentions to influence hearers’ attitudes; and yet some Chomskyan account of the capacities to produce and understand those utterances could also be true.
All through this field, as in other places where exciting work is going on, views which may well be compatible nevertheless struggle with one another. This is because they struggle for attention; the research programs may be compatible in content, but the thought that goes with each of them, “this is the way to go on,” excludes the others. This thought may be essential to the researcher—the synoptic peacemaker who pleads for compatibility is up in the observer’s balloon, not engaged at the scientific front. In Chomsky’s own case, however, a further dimension is involved, and a more important one. He associates his own approach with an affirmation of the depth of the human mind and the value of the individual, and he is suspicious on more than theoretical grounds of many styles of opposing theory.
Chomsky’s arguments with his opponents are painstakingly reasoned and academic in tone (though he is unduly given to that polemicists’ put-down, “unfortunately,” as in, “Unfortunately, X is rather careless in his references,” page 218). It is only after technical argument—but still too soon, granted some complexities we shall come to—that he falls back on ideological explanation, associating empiricist opposition to his views with social reaction. But through the laborious and sometimes peripheral self-defense, one can see that he is deeply distrustful and disapproving of some other ways of doing linguistics and the other human sciences, and that his linguistic theories, in their central contentions, have an ideological significance which relates them in some unclear but powerful way to his political and social outlook. This comes to the surface in a few pages of Chomsky’s present book, and it gets very brief consideration in the last item in Harman’s collection, Dell Hymes’s informative review of John Lyons’s book on Chomsky in the Modern Masters series (Viking, 1970). It is worth exploring further.
What exactly is involved in the innate component, what principles the language-acquisition device is armed with, are of course technical matters. But whatever they may exactly turn out to be, the more general question comes up of how to describe their presence. Chomsky has favored the terminology of unconscious, innate, knowledge, and this has helped to connect his theories with those Rationalist thinkers of the seventeenth century and later whom he has claimed, always with some caution, as his intellectual ancestors. Whether “knowledge” is the right concept, however, is a hard question. Certainly many objections which have been put to Chomsky, such as that, on his principles, a falling stone must know how to fall, entirely miss the point, and ignore the cognitive character of the states governed by Chomsky’s innate schemata, as Thomas Nagel well argues in Harman’s book. Yet, as Nagel also points out, there remains a long step to accepting the concept of knowledge as applying to the presence of the schemata themselves, and there are theoretical embarrassments in the use of that concept.
There is, for example, the question (raised elsewhere by Harman) of the vehicle by which this knowledge is represented in the mind, a vehicle looking suspiciously like another already mastered language. There is also the related problem that knowledge which is more than merely skill should imply the possession of concepts, and we have no reason to ascribe to the language-learner, at any level, the theoretical concepts of universal grammar. Chomsky’s own embryological analogy hardly points unwaveringly in the direction of a model that uses the notion of knowledge. In the present book he suggests that whether we call these potentialities “knowledge” is a verbal question, and he is prepared to let the word go; but how slight a concession this is becomes clear when he agrees to put, in place of “know,” the word “cognize.”
Chomsky’s insistence on a cognitive vocabulary to describe the presence of the innate schemata seems to be sustained by one of his strongest convictions, the power of linguistic theory to reveal the depth of the human mind. It implies an uncovering of lower, but continuously related, levels of human thought, and historically it helps to tie his theory to earlier Rationalist speculations. These, however, usually took a less naturalistic view of the mind than Chomsky does—the idea of a cognitive study as a branch of human biology is for Descartes’s own system unintelligible. But their views can, like his, be handily opposed to an empiricist outlook, which takes a shallower and more mechanical view of the psychological. That empiricist outlook can, moreover, Chomsky believes, be easily associated with a denial that there is a human nature, and with a manipulative and authoritarian conception of what can be done to human beings.
This opposition between rationalist and empiricist approaches (though, as Hymes says, Chomsky’s own theoretical work has transcended it) has great ideological significance for Chomsky. The empiricist conception of human beings as unpredisposed objects for conditioning he associates with potentialities for technological oppression. Chomsky admits that empiricist systems of ideas do, as a matter of historical fact, strongly resist being categorized in the way he requires, since the idea that there is no fixed human nature, but that man is a social product, has very often been associated (for instance, by many Marxists) with “progressive and even revolutionary social thinking,” while the opposite view has supported conservative and pessimistic outlooks.
“But a deeper look,” he goes on (page 132), “will show that the concept of the ‘empty organism,’ plastic and unstructured, apart from being false, also serves naturally as the support for the most reactionary social doctrines.” “Serves naturally” here is pure ideologists’ sticky tape, no better than “goes with.” Similarly unreliable connections are made when Chomsky goes into historical interpretation:
Empiricism rose to ascendancy in association with a doctrine of “possesive [sic] individualism” that was integral to early capitalism, in an age of empire, with the concomitant growth (one might almost say “creation”) of racist ideology. [Page 130]
In so far as this offers anything except evasive insinuation, it invites a quick answer: in any sense in which classical empiricism was “in association with” early capitalism, slavery, etc., so was its near contemporary, classical rationalism. No historical speculations of this sort can effect anything, and Chomsky’s other admissions show that he is, or at least has good reason to be, uneasy with them. He is likely to find better ground in certain features of the present. Now, when psychological technology is a conscious weapon of political power, and the notion of human needs as opposed to contingent preferences has been moved by many forces into the center of serious social thought, there really is a case for saying that the spirit of empiricist and, above all, behaviorist outlooks must, apart from their intellectual inadequacies, turn us in the wrong direction. Here Chomsky’s negative view, at least, seems to have real power.
But even so, it is more doubtful whether Chomsky’s own innatist doctrines can turn us in the right direction: they might even help to do the opposite. For here the question of the specificity of the language capacity, mentioned earlier, takes on a considerable and unexpected ideological significance. Chomsky’s claims have always been for the special character of man’s capacity for linguistic learning, and part of his evidence for this has precisely been that, the grossly defective apart, men are equal in this capacity, while differing in general intelligence and in their capacities to learn other things, such as physics. But now why should these distributions of innate capacities have any tendency at all to encourage belief in the foundations of libertarian socialism? Chomsky speaks of his hopes for progress toward human self-determination and genuine freedom; but the basic linguistic competence, as he describes it, has no connection with notions of progress at all—it is perfect as it is. What does leave room for progress, and indeed progress toward self-determination and freedom, is man’s lexical sophistication and conceptual grasp—but that, precisely, is a linguistic dimension in which men do differ, and in which the results of learning are not the same for all, and the innatist element correspondingly weaker.
Again, why should Chomsky’s theory have any power against racism, association with which was one of his more sinister charges against empiricism? In so far as racism has any coherent relation at all to opinions about different intellectual capacities, why should the fact of an equal innate capacity for language acquisition be thought to help against it? No theorist of apartheid is likely to be daunted by being reminded that the African child can effortlessly acquire Xhosa—or, come to that, Afrikaans.
If, on the other hand, the innatist claims are substantially extended from the field of language acquisition into other forms of learning (for instance, as Chomsky seems to speculate at one point, into moral capacities), the charge of their irrelevance to racist issues may decline, but the possibility of an unfortunate and destructive type of belief in their “relevance” might increase. It seems odd that anyone should need reminding at the moment that it is the environmentalist view on matters of “intelligence” which has been identified as the liberal one. The entire question of the ideological significance of such studies is now a notorious moral and intellectual mess, but to accept their ideological significance while cleaving to innatist styles of explanation may not necessarily be the most progressive way out of it.
An important point here is that in the field of language acquisition, Chomsky has good reason to equate what is genetically determined with what is common to the species. That equation may very well hold for all innate human cognitive capacities, but there is no a priori guarantee from the nature of genetics or anything else that it must be so.
The ideological implications of Chomsky’s theories are by no means straightforward or unambiguous, and Chomsky himself moves with dangerous speed and simplicity between his theoretical preoccupations and the political ideals for which he has so conspicuously stood up. In fact, the ideological effect of Chomsky’s work in language seems to me not so much to support or express distinctively socialist aspirations for society, or opposition to oppression, but rather, a stage further back, to assist a humane revaluation of tough-minded inquiry in the psychological sciences. His work, apart from its spectacular and ongoing effect in linguistics, constitutes the most powerful and encouraging reassurance that a psychological science which is recognizably continuous with the natural sciences does not have to treat human beings as very boring machines.
The recognition that human beings might be scientifically understood but are yet not just machines could well coexist with more than one kind of social or political view, not all equally liberal. But as well as being a vital truth in itself, it is a necessary step to any adequate views on these issues at all, including any adequate liberal views. It is here, in the humane understanding of science itself, rather than in more direct ideological interpretation, that the most general significance of Chomsky’s deeply impressive work is likely to be found.
Notes
1. Reflections on Language, by Noam Chomsky (Pantheon, 1975).
2. On Noam Chomsky: Critical Essays, edited by Gilbert Harman (Doubleday/Anchor, 1974).
The Selfish Gene, by Richard Dawkins
A philosopher, H.W.B. Joseph, who 50 years ago was (as Richard Dawkins now is) a fellow of New College Oxford, used to set as a first essay for philosophy students the problem: “what evolves?” Joseph’s question was a notably unfruitful one, but with the large and exciting development recently of both ideas and information in evolutionary biology, questions of that general sort retain their place in that they put a large premium on reflective power and intellectual imagination.
The sense that there are intellectual problems here which are both exciting and accessible, even if only imprecisely, to non-specialists, is well conveyed in Dawkins’s introduction to recent work in social biology.1 He discusses, with great clarity and an obvious flair for exposition, such subjects as the evolution of altruistic behaviour, and indeed of selfish behaviour; natural selection for sexual differentiation, the maintenance of sex ratios, and the evolution of the menopause; the importance of kinship, and its vital difference for genetic theory from mere group-membership. He throws light also on such things as deceit, mimicry and reciprocal altruism. He extensively and perspicuously uses decision-theoretical ideas, in particular Maynard Smith’s elegant concept of an evolutionarily stable strategy.
Dawkins is refreshingly free of two connected errors which rampage through popularisations of these subjects: that there is a straight extrapolation from the behaviour of systems under natural selection to anything at all about human society; and that nothing basic about human life is determined by culture. He explicitly and repeatedly denies both these falsehoods, and is very cautious in tracing any analogies between human social habits and genetically determined behaviour patterns in other species. He does, in a last and admittedly speculative chapter, try something different: not extending genetic theory itself into cultural phenomena, but applying to the explanation of cultural patterns a structure similar to that of genetic theory, using the notion of a cultural atom or “meme”, which is transmitted from one generation to another by education and socialisation. The bad experiences that the history of ideas has had with “atom-idea” concepts does not encourage one to believe in much future for this type of analysis.
The part of Dawkins’s account which will cause most trouble to the layman (I gather, to some experts as well) is the insistence, expressed in his title, that the unit whose “selfish” behaviour provides the motive power of evolution is the gene. Gene selection is the operative concept in evolutionary genetic explanation. Individual selection is, for quite a lot of the book, permitted, as an acceptable “approximation”. Group selection is throughout criticised and replaced by more basic modes of explanation.
This emphasis Dawkins presents in a good deal of rhetoric, some (like his dustjacket) of SF provenance. Animals and plants are “survival machines” which genes have built for themselves; a monkey is “a machine which preserves genes up trees”; “they swarm in huge colonies, safe inside gigantic lumbering robots … they created us, body and mind; and their preservation is the ultimate rationale for our existence”. He takes care to say that purposive language about genes is not to be taken seriously: it can all be translated out into statements about differential probabilities of survival and so forth. On this he does not mislead. But there are other objections. One is that the War of the Worlds image, apart from being (unlike the ideas themselves) rather boring, could leave an impression that even if genes do not really have purposes, evolution (after all) does, namely to make the world safe for genes—a purpose which is likely to seem obscurely threatening.
More seriously, the metaphors have not helped Dawkins to make entirely clear his answers to certain basic questions. In particular, I do not understand how exactly he sees the relation between three propositions which he asserts:
• that the genes which “struggle for survival” are pieces of chromosomal material;
• that a given piece does not always confer the same character—what it confers depends on context;
• that what are selected for, under evolutionary pressure, are characters.
In this connection, he does not give the reader the sense of seeing right into the question as much as he does with other issues in this successful and stimulating book.
Note
1. The Selfish Gene, by Richard Dawkins (Oxford University Press, 1976).
The Fire and the Sun: Why Plato Banished the Artists, by Iris Murdoch
In this short book, based on her 1976 Romanes Lecture, Iris Murdoch takes up Plato’s celebrated attack, from the point of view of philosophy and truth, on art and the artists.1 She considers where its weight lies, and compares its inner workings with other distrustful placings of art against morality, notably Kant’s and Tolstoy’s. She offers some thoughts, lastly, on the theme of how we might take something like Plato’s point and yet defend art, resisting his demand that such art as may be allowed by the state to exist should be socially useful, morally celebratory, or at least decently minimal—and minimal would mean really modest: ‘the paintings of (for instance) Mondrian and Ben Nicholson,’ she excellently says, ‘which might be thought of as meeting his requirements, would I think be regarded by Plato as histrionic and dangerously sophisticated.’
The book is not just an aesthetic argument on Platonic themes. It aims to go a good deal into Plato’s philosophy, to such an extent that the publishers claim that it ‘comprises in an accessible form a general view of the development of Plato’s thought’. This emphasis is in more than one way a pity. It curtails to a fragmentary and tantalising brevity Miss Murdoch’s suggestive remarks on what she rightly claims is a real question: in what way serious art can be understood as anything but threatening by a view which puts a conception of human goodness—as distinguished from human achievement—at the centre of life. In the place of pursuing that question in its own, and our, terms, Miss Murdoch’s chosen plan gives much room to a very curious account of Plato’s philosophy.
It is, first of all, in no obvious sense ‘accessible’. It is allusive and offhand: for one thing, no one will find it at all easy to follow unless he already knows something of the order in which Plato’s dialogues are supposed to have been written. Barely intelligible references to one or two works of scholarship, not further documented, are scattered in parentheses. Remarks about different themes in Plato are put together in ways which are quite often imaginative but, equally, bewildering. She has not been helped, further, by the printer, one of whose many misprints issues on p. 3 in the misleading information that Plato’s Forms are ‘part of an argument for the immorality of the soul’.
If the account of Plato is hard to follow for those who do not know about Plato, it must be said that for those who do it is hard to credit. She relies on a resolutely simple account of the development of Plato’s thought about the Forms, of a kind which has been indisputably modified, and many would say quite discredited, by modern scholarship. It is central to her story, to take just one example, that the strange cosmogonical dialogue the Timaeus, to which she gives a lot of attention, be placed unequivocally at the end of Plato’s life; but for the past 25 years at least this date has been strongly disputed, and anyone who puts so much on the old dating owes the scholars an argument or two.
It is a pity that all this has to be said, since the interesting questions could emerge without any commitment on these issues. Plato in one period, Plato in one mood, or merely Plato as he has often seemed, would serve better to set out her central themes than the elaborate involvement in speculative history and creaky scholarship. Among the several ideas that curl about in the rather cramped space left for them, a main stem is this: for Plato, beauty is a conception which, properly grasped, is allied with truth, knowledge, and moral demands, against art, pleasure, and the indulgence of the ego. The image of the Forms, unchanging intellectual objects, stands as a picture of the moral world, of the world of goodness, which makes an unyielding demand on human beings who, considered merely in themselves, are, in a phrase of the old Plato which is quoted more than once, ‘nothing much’. Platonic Eros, the passion for pure beauty, aroused for him in the first instance by boys and perhaps also by nature, but not (unlike us) by art, reaches out to that order of things that lies beyond us. The hardness and necessity of that moral order is linked also with the necessity of the natural order. For us, this necessity is, no doubt, just the necessity of how things are; for Plato, it is the necessity of the Cosmos, of the world conceived as created by and expressing ‘passionate selfless unenvious mind’. (No disjunction of fact and value here, no mere equivocation on the ‘must’ of what we must do and of what must be.) Reality and goodness must after all be one—Plato’s central doctrine: not because what is tangibly real, here and now, must be good—quite the contrary; rather, because both truth and goodness stand opposed to fantasy, distortion, the imaginative indulgence of the ego.
Miss Murdoch moves Plato, in his moral aspects, as close as she can get him to Kant, so that the Forms seem like a Greek façade surrounding that Gothic image, the Categorical Imperative. I think that this is a mistake about Plato’s moral psychology, which is in fact more egoistic, and more illuminatingly so, than she makes out. As an issue of general principle, not of history, this is an important point: much can turn on whether we picture morality in terms of abandoning ego in favour of reason, reality, or duty, or see it rather in terms of the formation of an ego on which the claims of morality can constitute reasonable demands. The Greeks generally, and rightly, preferred the latter, though there is a line in Plato, the line which Miss Murdoch exaggerates, which leads indeed in the direction of the former.
Suppose we are seized, as well we may be, by that line, and rest the weight on a conception of the good as something external to the ‘greedy’ ego (as Miss Murdoch often calls it), something inherent in a hard order of reality. What will we or she say to the claim—a pressing one, after all—that there is no such order of things, that what she would have us yearn for is not there? This is an embarrassment which has been latent in other of Miss Murdoch’s writings, and not solely in her philosophy. Faced with the historical retreat from a conception of the moral order as transcendental, one who nevertheless insists that goodness lies in correct perception and freedom from error will inevitably tend to locate the subject-matter of that knowledge or error merely in the world around us: the misperception which is sin will have to consist in a misunderstanding not of the cosmic order of things, but (for instance) of other people. In that direction, in total and ironical contrast to the original spirit of the thing, lies cosiness. Only connect, understand others, you cannot will evil. It is a pity—though, granted much else of what he said, hardly a surprise—that Nietzsche has not yet succeeded in persuading us what a hopeless thought that is.
Miss Murdoch, retaining a schematically Platonic language at least, but with something of a modern blank where the Cosmic Thing used to be, defends art against Plato. But her defence, in the last pages of the book, is notably thin and, to tell the truth, distinctly easy-going by the standards earlier praised. One thing art does is to stand in for the life of the Platonic sage. ‘It is just as well that there is a high substitute for the spiritual and speculative life: that few get to the top morally or intellectually is no less than the truth.’ (I wonder where she puts the moral top.) ‘Art is a great international human language, it is for all.’ (Why? Are the qualifications for understanding art lower than for understanding people?) ‘Of course art has no formal “social role” and artists ought not to feel that they must “serve their society”. They will automatically serve it if they attend to truth and try to produce the best art (make the most beautiful things) of which they are capable.’ (Two gigantic questions are begged there. One—that to serve art is to serve society—is centrally raised by Plato himself; the other—the equation of good and beautiful art—is raised by most modern art, at least.) ‘The connection of truth with beauty means that art which succeeds in being for itself also succeeds in being for everybody.’ (What—now?)
These are sentences which, carefully considered, would not have been written. It is a bit unnerving that, consecutively, they should be among her concluding reflections. It also belies many good things in the book—she has excellent things to say, for instance, on the morally destructive powers of irony, and on religious imagery in art. But on what we can and should now think on the largest issues she has raised, she sinks from the high and icy Platonic challenge to a very undemanding level of comfort. It is a striking fact that her most eloquent writing in this book is in the cause of a world view which we and she must know is an illusion.
Note
1. The Fire and the Sun: Why Plato Banished the Artists, by Iris Murdoch (Oxford University Press, 1976).
The Logic of Abortion
I want to take up some of the moral and philosophical issues involved in present controversies about legalised abortion. The puzzlement that people feel about this issue, and the deep disagreement that obtains between different people, are of the kind that invite philosophical reflection, and, in fact, a great deal has been written by philosophers about the issue in recent years, both here and in the USA. Though I shall not try to conceal my own views, what I shall try mainly to do is separate and point out some of the main threads in this discussion, rather than present a case.
A lot of the most important questions about the abortion issue I shall not try to discuss at all. Apart from some important practical issues, there are also some leading moral issues I shall have to leave aside. For instance, is it fair that women should find it easier to get an abortion in some districts rather than others? Again, how can we reconcile a woman’s right, under the law, to have an abortion with a doctor’s right not to perform an operation he morally disagrees with? These questions I shall have to leave aside. I shall consider only some of the most general questions raised by the principle of abortion.
One thing to be said about this debate right away is that it is, at no point, distinctively a debate about religion. It is, indeed, a fact that, among those who oppose the deliberate termination of pregnancy, many are Christians, and, in particular, Roman Catholics, but the views that they bring to bear on the issue are not uniquely Roman Catholic views. You do not have to have religious beliefs to be against murder, and it is not peculiar to Catholics to classify abortion as murder. Since the issues are not essentially connected with religious beliefs, I shall not make any special reference to religion from now on.
The shortest moral argument against abortion is the one I just mentioned—that abortion is, simply, murder. This very traditional line of argument will say: murder is the deliberate killing of an innocent human being; that is exactly what abortion is; it is therefore wrong. Let us call this the ‘murder argument’. It is a very simple argument. To those who offer it, that seems part of its virtue—it is a mark of its truth, which sophisticated qualifications are only designed to evade. To other eyes, its extreme simplicity seems to be bought just by assuming the answers to all the important questions before one begins to look at them.
Among those who want to crack the smooth surface of the murder argument, there are, of course, many different approaches. They can be usefully divided, I think, into two camps. The first camp shares a certain belief with the murder argument itself: that the central question here is a definitional question, in the sense that the important point lies in defining what class of beings the rule against deliberate killing applies to, and whether the foetus belongs to that class. This approach agrees with the murder argument in method, by treating the issue rather like a legal question about the application of a law, though it disagrees, of course, about what the verdict should be. The second camp of those who reject the murder argument want to get away from that type of debate altogether.
The main definitional issue has been whether the foetus is, within the terms of the moral law against murder, a human being or not. In one way, the answer to this question seems to be ‘yes’, and, indeed, obviously ‘yes’. The foetus is, after all, a living thing, and it does not belong to any other species. But then we are faced with the familiar fact that the foetus is, up to a certain point, not a formed human being, and, even after that point, it is not a fully formed human being. If one pursues that kind of consideration, one can naturally arrive at the conclusion that it is when the foetus is viable that it is properly or fully a human being; and drawing the line at this point will, of course, yield a more permissive abortion policy than the murder argument originally anticipated.
If the murder argument is going to insist absolutely on the humanity of the foetus before viability—its humanity, that is to say, in the sense relevant to how it is to be treated—then certainly it will yield a quite strikingly conservative abortion policy. If you consider a separate, already born, human being—consider, for instance, one who is already grown—it would be generally agreed that one cannot just kill him because he is likely to contract some disabling disease, or, again, because his mother runs a risk of death or injury if he is not killed; and since the point of the murder argument is to insist on the equal humanity of all human beings, it could not permit even very early termination, even in cases where deformity or disablement of the infant is indicated, or, again, serious harm to the mother.
The murder argument, then, in its use of the concept, ‘human being’, seems to yield either a very permissive abortion policy or an absolutely rigidly negative one: a permissive policy if ‘human being’ implies viability and a negative one if it does not. In this second, rigidly negative version, the argument is using one undoubted biological fact—that the foetus is a developing member of the species—to do all the work, while many will feel that their problem starts from that fact and cannot simply be solved by referring to it.
A different definitional question arises if one applies the prohibition on murder not to human beings as such, but to persons. Even if the foetus is a human being, it seems easy to deny that it is a person, where this implies faculties of communication, relations to others, consciousness of a fairly complex kind, and so on. Some philosophers argue that it is not human beings as such, merely biologically determined, that we should be particularly concerned with, but rather with persons; and the foetus is not yet a person.
The trouble about this—or, rather, what I find the trouble about this, since the philosophers in question seem to be pretty unconcerned about these consequences—is that, if the foetus is not yet a person, then neither is the newborn baby; nor again, if the requirements of personhood are made sophisticated enough, will small children be persons. What is more, the senile, and other adults in a defective condition, will be, on this sort of showing, ex-persons or sub-persons. Of course, those who think in this way will urge other rules with respect to non-persons, and will doubtless urge us not to cause unnecessary suffering to any sentient thing. But if failure to qualify in the person stakes is enough, as this argument would have it, to eliminate restrictions on killing the foetus, it is presumably enough to remove restrictions on killing those other non-persons as well, and the results of taking this line will be wide-ranging indeed.
There is a deep fault with the notion of a person, as used in these connections. It sounds like an all-or-nothing matter, whether a given creature is a person or not, but, in fact, the term turns out just to mean that the creature displays, to some extent—it seems, an arbitrary extent—some psychological and social characteristics which lie on a sliding scale. Unlike the matter of degree presented by the physical development of the foetus, questions raised by the variable scale of psychological characteristics arise all over the place: with the old, for instance, as I have mentioned.
The ‘person’ approach to abortion presents, perhaps more than any other, the danger of the slippery slope, by which one’s decisions about abortion leave one with no way of resisting other policies about killing and death about which one would have the gravest qualms. Some tough philosophers would say that this merely shows that we should not have qualms about those policies, such as infanticide, suppression of the senile, and so on. I find it quite unclear, however, what is supposed to give their arguments more authority with us than is possessed by our sense of humanity, as it is significantly called.
I have already touched, implicitly, on the notion of a right, and the language of ‘rights’ is indeed involved quite deeply in this debate. It is invoked, of course, by both sides. Thus, on the one hand, there is talk of the rights of the unborn child; on the other, one hears, sometimes, of the right of the woman to do what she likes with her own body. These particular ways of talking about rights very obviously presuppose, each in its own way, answers to the definitional questions I have just been discussing. If you can dispose of the issue by saying that it is just an issue of the woman’s right to do what she likes with her own body, then you are implying that the foetus is to be regarded just as part of the woman’s body, which is to answer the definitional question one way. If you treat the matter in terms of the rights of the unborn child, then you are answering the definitional question the other way, seeing the foetus as a human being, like any other, with rights. So these particular ways of bringing in rights are very closely tied to the definitional issues.
Another line of argument, however, makes an effort to get away from the definitional issue, and belongs rather to what I called, earlier, the second camp of those who resist the murder argument: the camp of those who try to get away from the question of defining the foetus, whether as a human being or a person. They may say: ‘Let us agree, if you like, that the foetus is a human being, and killing the foetus is a case of killing a human being. The question is, in what circumstances one is justified in doing that.’
One way of trying to answer that question has, again, invoked the idea of a right. It asks whether we can think of circumstances analogous enough to the situation in which abortion is at issue, to help us decide whether we could have the right to kill a human being in such a situation. A bold argument on these lines has been advanced by the American philosopher Judith Jarvis Thomson. She suggests that, if one woke up one day and found oneself strapped to another adult human being, with his life-systems dependent on one’s own, so that the only way to get rid of him was to kill him, then one could have the right to kill him—even if one was partly responsible for his being there. I have presented the example very baldly, without Ms Thomson’s striking and chilling elaboration, which makes it more plausible than perhaps I have done, that one would have the right to kill this incubus.
But even if one were persuaded that one had the right to kill the incubus, it is hard to see how that conclusion could merely carry over to the abortion case. One difference between the cases is that pregnancy is normal and not freakish. Another is that, in itself, it only lasts nine months. Another is that, because it is normal, and normally issues in a baby, it has sentiments and reactions attached to it which could not be attached to the freakish case of the incubus. These differences do not all cut the same way with regard to the abortion issue, but, in my view, they do discourage the idea that we are going to get much insight into the rights and wrongs of abortion by considering what we might say about rights in such imaginary situations—situations which may have some structural resemblance to the pregnancy situation, but are, at the same time, freakishly unlike it.
This brings out a question which has been gradually pressing itself on us all the time: whether pregnancy, the situation in which abortion is in question, is enough like anything else at all for us to reach answers about it by analogy from other situations. While the definitional approach was faced with the problem that the foetus is neither just like nor just unlike an independently existing human being, argument by moral analogy faces the problem that pregnancy is, at once, highly familiar and also very unlike any other situation.
There is one school of thought which, at any rate, is better placed to acknowledge that fact than the others I have mentioned. This is the utilitarian approach, which considers the issue entirely in terms of consequences, the consequences being measured in terms of happiness and unhappiness. This approach does not need to get involved in the definitional issues; nor does it find it helpful to think in terms of rights.
That it does not have to worry about the issues of definition comes out clearly when one reflects that, if we can think about social questions in terms of consequences at all adequately, we must, in general, be able to think in terms of the consequences of various policies for merely possible people, people who may not exist at all. In thinking about birth control and population policies, for instance, we have to think about how things would be for people who, if those policies are adopted, will never be conceived. All the more, then, we should be able to think about the possible welfare of someone who, if a pregnancy is terminated, will never be born, and it does not matter for this consequentialist argument how the foetus itself is classified.
Those who feel strongly that the foetus is an actual human being, with actual rights, will, of course, reject the utilitarian approach, which attaches little weight to whether this is an actual human being, and, in general, is not very concerned with rights. Utilitarians tend to regard the language of rights as an obscure and unhelpful way of discussing matters better considered in the light of the all-round consequences.
If we reject the view that the foetus is unqualifiedly a human being who has rights like any other—and I suggested, earlier, that the consequences of accepting that could be very conservative indeed—we will, to that extent, agree with the utilitarians about the abortion issue (though we may well not agree with them more generally in their unconcern for rights). But even those who agree thus far with the utilitarians may well have other worries about the utilitarian approach. Does utilitarianism pursue its study of consequences far enough?
Obviously, in a matter such as abortion, we must be concerned not just with the consequences of each particular case, for the particular mother and the particular child, if it is born. The more general consequences of having certain sorts of laws and practices also come into it. Here, it is a valid question to ask what sort of society the practice of abortion on a wide and liberal basis would fit into; what general outlooks would naturally go with it; what attitudes to birth and to killing you would have to teach young people if they were to live easily in such a society. Moreover, in asking that sort of question, we need to look to a wider range of values than utilitarianism admits—values which go beyond happiness, or, at any rate, involve a deeper conception of happiness than utilitarianism usually admits.
The situation we actually have now, it seems to me, is that this wide range of questions is most characteristically raised by opponents of freer abortion, who answer it by predicting a society indifferent to human life and to human values if abortion is widely sanctioned. Those on the other side often seem indifferent to the issues of how a certain practice demands an appropriate outlook and set of values to go with it, and what that outlook might, in the case of abortion, be. They urge the particular miseries of the particular cases, which is forceful enough, but this, often conjoined with an emphasis on individual freedom, does not meet the anxieties of the other side. Thus, each of these opponents feels that the other side is indifferent to what should most be cared about. This leads to something characteristic of this controversy: that each side honestly regards the other as heartless.
Clearly, the larger question must be raised. What sort of society would it be that had got thoroughly used to the institution of relatively liberal abortion? What kind of life goes with that? Would it threaten other values, such as the rights of the senile not to be tidied away? The question must be raised, but I do not see why the answer to it has to be hostile to a liberal abortion policy. I pointed earlier, to the fact that the pregnancy situation, the situation which raises the question of abortion, just is markedly different from others, in particular from others that involve life and death. This is not a problem which has to invite the slippery slope—even though it easily can do so if it is wrongly treated. A social context in which liberal abortion laws are both in effect and easily accepted may not have to be one in which there is general indifference to human life.
Whether it is actually possible, in the long run, to have a society which combines full acceptance of liberal abortion institutions with humane attitudes to such things as birth, death and killing depends, in part, on whether it is genuinely possible for most people, without either self-deception or brutality, to feel that the killing of a foetus is something basically different from the killing of a separate human being: to feel that, not just to think it. Whether that is possible for most people I do not claim to know. But there is one significant piece of evidence on the subject which does not seem to be often mentioned: that there is a difference between the death of a foetus in early pregnancy, and the death of a separate human being.
This is a difference, above all, in the experience of women. A genuine psychological distinction, for most women, exists with regard to spontaneous abortion: for most women, to miscarry at two or three months is not at all the same experience as a stillbirth, or an infant dying in its first weeks. I speak of the emotional or psychological difference, not just of the obvious physical difference, though that itself no doubt contributes. If there is that difference with regard to spontaneous abortion, it is no good, on the question of induced abortion, advancing theories or fears which involve the consequence that the difference should not exist, that miscarriage and stillbirth should seem the same. Yet many moral theories about abortion do seem to have that consequence.
This is a point about the experience of women. In the end, this issue can only come back to the experience of women. This is not because their experiences are the only thing that count. It is because their experiences are the only realistic and honest guide we have to what the unique phenomenon of abortion genuinely is, as opposed to what moralists, philosophers and legislators say it is. It follows that their experience is the only realistic guide to what the deepest consequences will be of our social attitudes to abortion.
On Thinking, by Gilbert Ryle
Gilbert Ryle, who died in 1976, was for many years a professor of philosophy in Oxford. He was a man of genially military appearance, with a knobbly, cubic head; rather soldierly in speech and manner, he punctuated his sentences with an abrupt half-cough, highly characteristic of him and much imitated. He was an exceptionally nice man, friendly, generous, uncondescending, unpretentious, and, for a well-known professional philosopher, startlingly free from vanity. He affected an amiable Philistinism, which to some degree was also genuine: ‘no ear for tunes,’ he was disposed to say, if music was mentioned. He was often amusing. He once said of a philosophically-disposed senior Tory politician that he stood like a light out to sea, firmly beckoning ships on to the rocks.
He gave very sensible advice, telling his pupils, for instance, not to do a PhD unless they had to, since it was ‘better to write a short good book later than a bad long book earlier’. He also gave excellent advice in philosophy, and communicated some good philosophical habits. His example was borne along on a certain anti-theoretical breeziness, but he showed philosophy to be a serious subject, and he conveyed a sound contempt for ‘isms’, schools, and mechanical party loyalties. He told a story, which he claimed to be true—and he was a truthful man—to the effect that when he had lectured in Germany after the war, a young man came up and said: ‘Doctor Ryle, I admired your lecture, and should like to join your school: unfortunately I am a Kantian.’
I first encountered Ryle myself as a student, around the time that he published his major book The Concept of Mind in 1950. The book had considerable influence, creating both a style and a focus of discussion. It was a professedly anti-Cartesian tract, aimed at ‘the ghost in the machine’, and against theories which represented the mental life as a hidden immaterial process duplicating or paralleling observable doings (as Ryle was disposed to put it). In pushing against such models, it inclined, to put it mildly, in a behaviourist direction. It seemed to suggest that there was no conscious inner life at all. This impression was not intended by Ryle, and was denied by him, but it was encouraged both by the general style of the argument and by the briskly commonsensical tone in which the mental life was treated. Along with the philosophical aim of reducing, so far as possible, the hidden inner to the obvious outer, Ryle seemed to have a more general project of replacing the less workaday with the more workaday.
Ryle had started out, in the late 1920s, with an interest in Phenomenology. He even wrote a quite favourable review of Heidegger’s Sein und Zeit when it first appeared. There are historical connections between these interests and some features of The Concept of Mind, but by the time he wrote that book his methods had become ‘linguistic’, and his style one of those that constituted what has been called ‘linguistic philosophy’. He dealt in uses of words, and his arguments rested heavily on considerations of what did and did not make sense. Since he wrote in English, it was a question of what did and did not make sense in English, but he always dissociated himself from the minute interest in fine points of usage which some of his colleagues displayed. He claimed that any sound argument of the kind that he used reached below the level of a particular natural language, and could be translated. The Concept of Mind has indeed experienced, and perhaps survived, translation into other languages, most recently—very recently—into French.
The idea that the results transcended any local language was expressed in The Concept of Mind in terms of a notion of categories, which allowed Ryle to say that certain terms stood for dispositions, or processes, or occurrences, and so forth; and he thought that the errors underlying the dualistic view of mind stemmed in good part from what he called ‘category mistakes’—in particular, from a tendency to interpret as a hidden or inner occurrence something that was correctly understood as an overt or behavioural disposition. Many of Ryle’s results took the form of allocations of concepts to categories, a style of conclusion memorably parodied by a student at the time in the dictum: ‘shop-lifting is not a feat of strength.’
In later years, Ryle became suspicious of the category machinery, feeling, as he was disposed to feel with any technical machinery, that it created its own problems. By the time he wrote the pieces collected in this volume, he had largely given it up. This book gathers together seven papers and one review all concerned with the topic of thinking, and also a fragment about another philosopher’s views of Wittgenstein. Three of the papers have not been published before; all the papers form part of the work Ryle had done for a book on thinking which he was planning when he died.1
The central question, variously and often obliquely approached, is one that he felt that he had left unsolved in The Concept of Mind: how to characterise that sort of thinking which consists in silent meditation or reflection, the activity, as Ryle constantly puts it, of Rodin’s Penseur. The Concept of Mind had effectively attacked any idea that mental activity typically takes such a form, or that intelligent action is action monitored by such an internal process. The book gave no account, however, of what that activity itself might be, and indeed left little room for its existence. In pursuit of this question, Ryle takes up such subjects as talking to oneself, teaching oneself, and thinking as soliloquy.
The apparatus of categories did earlier provide some rationale, if an obscure and insecure one, for the linguistic arguments. If one thinks that there is a basic, universal framework of categories, then it is a sensible procedure, by examining language, to try to relate various concepts to that framework. In the absence of that apparatus, however, Ryle’s linguistic arguments are scarcely tied to anything, and it is a persistent failing of these essays that it is quite unclear why given linguistic considerations are supposed to count for particular philosophical conclusions. Many of the arguments here fail, because they rest on no coherent conception of the relation between mental phenomena and the language that describes them.
Thus, supporting a conclusion of Zeno Vendler’s (a conclusion contrary to a long philosophical tradition) that knowledge is not a kind of belief—for example, true and well-founded belief—Ryle cites the fact that one can know what …, where …, whether … etc., but one cannot believe what … etc. But this does not prove anything at all. Leaving aside the important area of practical knowledge—and the tradition has not supposed that practical knowledge is a species of belief—the answer to Ryle’s point will simply be that if someone knows, for instance, who stole the jewels, then he knows of some person that that person stole the jewels: that is to say, he knows that something, and this knowledge may indeed be a species of belief. The grammars of ‘know’ and ‘believe’ are indeed different, but more than that is needed to lead one to this sort of conclusion about knowledge and belief.
Other arguments in the book are just too blunt and brisk. One of the more startling conclusions that Ryle claims is that it makes no sense to assert or deny that someone thinks in English, say, or French—or in words, come to that. If that is a truth, it is a surprising one. But the only argument Ryle offers, so far as I can see, is that an orator considering words for a speech, or a translator for a translation, does not think ‘in’ the words he is considering for his purpose, but thinks about them. No general conclusion can follow from that: he may think about those words in other words. There is probably a truth lurking in what Ryle says, but his considerations do not bring it to light.
Ryle believed in arguments in philosophy. The tiny fragment about Wittgenstein interestingly, and convincingly, makes out that Wittgenstein also did so, though it has been said that in his later work he did not (Wittgenstein seems sometimes to say it himself). Ryle shared also with Wittgenstein, and no doubt in part derived from him, certain other things. One was the important belief that the philosophy of mind had to get beyond both dualism and behaviourism: in these essays Ryle can be seen explicitly trying to do that, as he had not successfully done in The Concept of Mind.
Another thing he shared was a hatred, not of argument, but of philosophical theory. This distrust of theory was typical of much linguistic philosophy of the 1950s; with it there went a rejection of the idea that philosophy could be continuous with theoretical interests of the sciences. Ryle was open to many new philosophical ideas, but these limiting conceptions he sustained into a later time. When he found a disposition to theorise joined to an admiration for Cartesian notions of innate knowledge, every hackle was raised, and the only intemperate piece here is that in which, disagreeing now with Vendler, he attacks Chomsky for his well-known view that a child’s acquisition of language can be explained only by postulating a determinate innate mechanism for acquiring it, a mechanism which, Chomsky thinks, it is appropriate to call innate knowledge. It is a deep idea, and a powerful and illuminating debate has occurred about it. It is sad to find Ryle bluffly dismissing the whole business with a philistine diagnosis, clearly wrong, of why Chomsky thought that there was anything in it.
Ryle had a very distinctive style, marked by long lists of words, particularly adverbs, and by an epigrammatic turn. He seems to have developed the style without reflection, but he became very conscious of himself as a stylist, and the mannerisms eventually took over, and carried him at times beyond the bounds of self-parody. The most exaggerated example here is probably the first piece, in which he writes, for instance:
If Le Penseur is trying to compose a melody, then he is very likely to be humming notes and sequences of notes, aloud, under his breath or in his head—not just humming them, of course, but humming them experimentally, suspiciously, cancellingly, rehearsingly, recapitulatingly, and so on. These very notes and note sequences that he hums composingly, he might, by chance, have hummed gramophonically and with his mind on something else. Or if Le Penseur is trying to render an English poem into French, while he is unlikely to be humming notes and note-sequences, he is likely instead to be murmuring them, of course, experimentally, suspiciously, cancellingly, rehearsingly, recapitulatingly …
The mannerisms seem to have provided a substitute for the theoretical backing which he was so reluctant to give his arguments. He taught his pupils, in the most honourable and impressive way, to sift argument from rhetoric, but his own philosophy came increasingly to depend on an idiosyncratic rhetoric. Having given up the only account he had of the relations between linguistic observation and philosophical subject-matter, he was left only with common-sense and the resources of a style: a style which, to some extent, in its consciously dry jokes, expressed him, but which, under pressure of what it had to provide, was driven at the extreme to a kind of compulsive incantation which was far from the nature of this clipped, controlled man.
I knew Gilbert Ryle quite well, and liked him very much. As many others do, I owe him a lot, both personally and intellectually. I am afraid that those who did not know him, although they will get an overpowering sense of a certain style, will not find the real quality of his intellectual presence in these mannered, empty and unconvincing essays. They are late work, and he left better and perhaps more lasting material in pages of The Concept of Mind and in earlier papers. But it may be that, more generally, it was the activity rather than the product that mattered. I do not think that that would have surprised or upset him.
Note
1. On Thinking, by Gilbert Ryle, edited by Konstantin Kolenda (Blackwell, 1979).
Rubbish Theory, by Michael Thompson
The author of this book was once a builder, working particularly for the ‘knockers through’, as he calls them, who turn two rooms into one in terrace houses and make other well-known changes to convert a collapsing slum into a thing of pride and a joy for ever. Thompson’s sharp descriptions of these operations, and of the contrasts between the attitudes of those who own these gentrified residences and their working-class neighbours, who regard few of their possessions as things of pride or joy, and certainly not for ever, offer some of the few enjoyable passages in the book. They also contain one of the main ideas for it.1
The idea is that what was originally regarded as a transient object—something which would last for a limited time, and then wear out—can make a transition into a durable object, regarded as lasting, theoretically, for ever; and that it makes this transition by passing through the category of rubbish, in which an object has no value at all. This category is at certain points said to be covert or invisible, which seems sometimes to mean that the category, or at least its operation in the system, is hidden from us, and sometimes (even less plausibly) that the objects in it are unnoticed. Slums are rubbish housing. Another example worked out to illustrate the idea is that of Stevengraphs, a kind of popular Victorian woven picture which sold for small sums in the 19th century and then disappeared from the market, until, by a familiar modern process, they were ‘discovered’, and now fetch large prices, have a written history, and so on. They are nearing the state in which they can fly out of the top of the exchange system altogether, and enter the ultimate reserve of durability—a museum.
The transition from transient to rubbish to durable is said to happen only in that direction. Nothing changes, for instance, from durable to rubbish, or gets from transience to durability without passing through rubbish. These results are protected against counter-examples largely by definition.
This structure, and the changes that occur within it, are then related to systems of social control. ‘Those people near the top have the power to make things durable and to make things transient, so they can ensure that their own objects are always durable and that those of others are always transient.’ Just as there was a doubt whether rubbish is invisible, or unthinkable, or both, it is not clear what it is, according to Thompson, that people near the top can determine: whether it is the actual pattern of ownership, or, rather, the way in which society thinks about the things that people happen to own. Having said that ‘slumminess is imposed by the social system,’ Thompson seems to be arguing with himself whether this means (or principally means) that the social system keeps itself going by creating what are indeed slums, or, alternatively, that ‘slum’ is a classification which the system allows the powerful to apply to whatever buildings it suits their interests to apply it to.
The theory next incorporates the notions of production and consumption. ‘Consumption’ is treated in a puzzling way; and certainly not as it is used in economics. Transient objects are ‘consumed’ when they are used up; rubbish is said to be ‘consumed’ when it is disposed of or processed, as in a sewage farm. Durables cannot be ‘consumed’. A certain amount of paradox flowing from the assumption that VAT is a tax on consumption—which, with ‘consumption’ used like this, it clearly is not—leads to reflections on art-objects, the resistance of artists to their works being treated as items of commerce, and so on. The structure of rubbish theory adds nothing to these ideas, and actually makes it harder for them to register their impact. The distinction between the transient and the durable is very poorly related to the distinction between what does and what does not have a market price, with the result that his vocabulary does not even help Thompson to make clearly a good point which, I think, he wants to make: that the attempted escape to auto-destructive or otherwise transient art-products will probably leave the artist still trapped within the commercial system.
At this stage of the book, rubbish theory, in its own name, steps back, and we turn to applications of catastrophe theory, a branch of mathematics developed by René Thom which provides descriptions of sudden and discontinuous changes. This is applied to a supposed cycle, suggested by Basil Bernstein, between a ‘collection curriculum’ in institutions of education, which consists of self-sufficient and separate subjects, and an ‘integrated curriculum’ which does not. The first of these is associated with authoritarian arrangements and Louis Dumont’s homo hierarchicus; the latter with democratic arrangements and homo aequalis. They are expressed, indeed, in different styles of architecture: ‘collection curriculum architecture emphasises the vertical; integrated curriculum architecture emphasises the horizontal.’ Even the undemanding reader who is nodding these assertions into his mind and out again may be held up by the next one: ‘the most complete and perfect example of the former is the Radcliffe Camera in Oxford: a Parthenon-in-the-round, presenting a perfect façade in all directions.’ The circle of the Radcliffe Camera, like the colour circle, one might have expected to serve rather well as an emblem of the opposite thing, curricular integration. I suspect that there must be something about its age or place that inhibits Thompson from working his trick the other way round.
Catastrophe theory provides a geometrical model for the sudden collapse of ‘boundary maintenance’ between subjects, so a collective curriculum under stress turns suddenly into an integrated curriculum—leaving, it seems, a mess, out of which people have to crawl back into a new collective curriculum. No evidence is mentioned that this cycle in curricula actually occurs, let alone that the particular set of psychological motivations invoked to explain it are relevant. We come out from Thompson’s wonder tunnel of three-dimensional graphs clutching no more than the recognition that if curricula developed, for any reason, in a cycle that involved sudden collapse, then catastrophe theory, the theory of sudden collapse, could be used to describe that cycle. Three minutes inside the Radcliffe Camera, or outside it, can give better rewards.
How the two main characters of this book, rubbish theory and catastrophe theory, are related to one another, is a question that is never discussed. The book ends with the modest claim that these theories will enable us to handle both persistence and change, both evolution and revolution, will substitute the ‘Heracleitean hypothesis’ for the ‘cartesian’, and, together, will ‘allow us to embrace a less repressive style in which problems give way to capabilities’.
There is, indeed, one substantial piece of theoretical work in the book: one chapter which offers what might be a contentful and interesting explanation of what is said to be a genuine social phenomenon. This is an explanation of a complex cyclical interchange of pigs and pork between tribes in New Guinea. However, this is done largely with some ideas from Keynesian economics: it uses catastrophe theory only in a marginal way, and it has nothing to do with rubbish theory at all. That section apart, this book contains virtually no serious intellectual work at all. There is no such thing as rubbish theory. There is just a bright perception, taken up from the surface of our culture, which might have made a jokey article. As a phenomenon, however, the book is striking: it combines in a very obvious and concentrated form all the most poisonous features of bad social science.
There is, first of all, a pervasive methodological mess: general statements which may or may not be tautologies; supposed paradoxes or ‘contradictions’ which are only the product of some unquestioned and idiotic assumption; vague assimilations of one thing to another, presented as theoretical discoveries of great abstractness and rigour. Mere rubbish, however, as Thompson himself insists, should not be saleable. What may give all this some popular appeal is something else: a pervasive knowingness, self-deprecating in tone, but suggesting at the same time a large and dangerous daring. Masks are being removed, threatening truths revealed, and a conspiracy of misdirection thwarted.
There is a particular trick which is used at several points to create this effect of risky revelation. It is one possible and appropriate aim of social science to provide a sociology of belief. From the starting-point that beliefs are to an important degree socially determined—something more widely recognised and more deeply discussed than Thompson seems to realize—he moves, usually in one sentence, to the suggestion that beliefs are politically determined, and serve some class or similar interest: with a flick of the wrist he manages to insinuate something hard-working Marxists are still struggling to define and establish.
The idea that beliefs are socially determined has well-known reflexive problems: what of the theory itself that reveals the determination? Much thought has been given to that question, from Hegel and Marx onwards. You would not gather that here. The witness to the problem, in Thompson’s text, is rather a characteristic tone: self-deprecatingly aware, at some points, of its environment, while vastly ambitious, at others, in transcending that environment; sometimes reflexively and tolerantly relativistic, elsewhere condescending, deflating and snide. It is the tone of much contemporary writing about society.
I have entertained the idea, and not utterly rejected it, that this book is a brilliant parody, a perceptive send-up of the most degraded kinds of social theorising. If so, it is too long, but marvellous. However, I fear that that is probably not so: if not, there must be some other explanation of how the book came to be so concentratedly what it is. It may have something to do with Thompson’s experiences as a renovating builder. Writing about those, he is noticeably uneasy, as well as condescending, towards his customers. He tends to fall back on the easy case where they can be despised for their taste, for putting in the wrong doors and fireplaces. But there must have been some, and he shows that there were, who made genuinely decent houses out of slums; at the same time, their relation to the neighbourhood, and to the social process in which they were all embedded, was much the same whatever their taste, and made him (and no doubt many of them) uneasy. He helped them to do these things, and was paid to do so; reflecting on the process, he was, very understandably, ambivalent about it.
Later, when he was lecturing in social science—probably, to infer from the book, to art students—he had new customers, keen to knock through the last distinctions in the decaying intellectual terrace. They must have multiplied his ambivalence in several dimensions at once. In this case, he was himself required to inhabit the terrace; moreover, he had no means of telling which was a load-bearing wall. His book is perhaps best heard as a cry, aggressive but still ambivalent, from under the rubble.
Note
1. Rubbish Theory, by Michael Thompson (Oxford University Press, 1979).
Lying: Moral Choice in Public and Private Life, by Sissela Bok
In 1960, when a U2 spy plane was shot down over Soviet territory, the Americans first denied that the plane had been spying; later, Eisenhower publicly owned up. The incident raised some questions about political lying. It was clear that what made the Russians particularly angry was not being spied on, nor being first lied to, both of which they took for granted, but being publicly told the truth, which put them in a difficult position. It was not clear, admittedly, exactly why it put them in a difficult position, since everyone—or at least everyone whose opinion in any way bore on them—knew that the first story was a lie; but clearly there is something to appearances (or was, since things may have changed a bit), even those that do not appear to be more than appearances.
Ms. Bok, though she refers to the incident more than once, does not take up such questions as what is saved in saving the appearances. Indeed, she mentions only the fact of the lie, and says that many Americans were shocked when they heard of it—and I take her to mean that they were shocked that it was committed, not that it was admitted. It is characteristic of her book that she leaves out the politically interesting half of the event. Her approach is that of moral philosophy: and what above all emerges from her treatment of lying is that she is against it.1
She has a good subject, and within the rather severe limits set by her commitment both to moral philosophy and to morality, handles it well. She gives useful materials on the history of the morality of truth-telling. She sets out clearly, and reasonably rejects, both the absolutist position which forbids all lying, and the consequentialist position which sees it as just one option among others. She considers, among many other aspects, excuses, white lies, lying to elicit the truth, and paternalism. She refuses to get bogged down in the excessive subtleties which have often been spun around the casuistry of this subject, whether it be about the exact difference between telling a lie and withholding the truth, or that between lying to someone and merely misleading them. She needs these distinctions, as the rest of us do, but she does not try to hang much moral weight on them. I take this to be a matter of moral as much as of philosophical principle with her: her severity falls as firmly on those who try to define their way out of lying as on those who go in for it. There are points at which she might usefully have been a little more philosophically insistent about the nature and boundaries of deceit. One small example comes up within the subject which is her usual field and which she discusses best, medical ethics. She is hard on the use of placebos, but she never exactly says why she supposes them to be deceitful. As the physician gives the starch pill he says (or his giving it says): “this will make you better”. If the patient believes him, and the doctor has chosen the treatment well, what he says is true. So how can he deceive? It cannot be that what his giving the pill says is “this will make you better whatever you believe about it”—many medicines would fail that test. It is, of course, easy to think of other things that the pill-giving might say, which would be false: as, “there is something in this which is specifically related chemically to what is wrong with you”. But why should we believe that the speech-acts of medical practice bear such precise pharmacological implications?
Ms. Bok’s doubts about the use of placebos probably relate rather to the fact that their use implies a lack of openness with the patient. There is something the doctor knows about the efficacy of this pill which it is essential that the patient should not know, and which cannot be declared between them. But Ms. Bok herself admits that there are some situations in medical practice of which that can properly be true; and if there are cures which work through belief, and which, when they work, validate that belief, then surely they would afford another such case?
The idea of openness plays a central role in Ms. Bok’s ethical thought. It is for her a vital test of the morality of a social practice, that the practice could be openly declared among all who are affected by it. A test of this kind has attracted a number of philosophers (it figures, for instance, in Rawls’ Theory of Justice), and it is certainly significant, but in the application to lying, at least, it is not at all clear how it is supposed to work. The test shares an important difficulty with one of its prominent intellectual ancestors, Kant’s Categorical Imperative, in that everything turns on how specific the rule is which is to be publicly understood. If there has to be a clear understanding between you and me that one may lie in the precise circumstances that we both know that we are in, lies are going to be less useful, at least, than they are at present. Indeed, it might turn out that they were no use at all. I suspect that Ms. Bok would subscribe to the maxim that one may lie only when one must lie, when there is no morally acceptable alternative. Granted this, it will follow that under conditions of sufficiently specific publicity, including your knowing that I am a conscientious moral person, my lies could not deceive you at all. At the other extreme to this, the conditions of the publicly acknowledged rule might be very unspecific, as that one may lie when the public interest is at stake: but then we are where we anyway are, in the ethical quagmire which Ms. Bok deplores.
There are, then, some theoretical doubts even about Ms. Bok’s moral test. But there are some deeper and larger subjects, which she never touches on at all. Some concern the relation of the values of personal honesty to other social values; there are also questions about the extent to which a moral test can, in public life, reasonably be expected to be observed anyway, and under what political conditions. The shadows of the Vietnam War and of Watergate fall heavily across this book, but virtually none of it, in fact, is about politics. There is a brief and rather weak final chapter in which some institutional aids to public veracity are discussed, but the book hardly ever confronts the issues of how truth-telling should be related more generally to politics and to social institutions.
To take just one issue, Ms. Bok unquestioningly assumes throughout that the demand for honest politicians, and the demand for limitless information—the “right to know”—support one another, and do not conflict. This assumption is open to question. One may have secrets whose content is not discreditable, and if one is allowed one’s secrets, one need not lie. Cases such as Watergate lead away from this issue. There, the secrets are indeed discreditable, and the lying simple villainy. From any moral point of view, in fact, Watergate is boring. No one doubts that those in power should not act like that. The interesting question—besides the issue of how such people come to power—is rather how one stops them so acting, and here the freedom of information must certainly help: the right to know is undoubtedly a weapon to discourage those in power from doing what they have no right to do.
The U2 incident, however, provides quite a different kind of case. If the right to spy is granted at all, then the right to know must be suspended; or if it is insisted upon, then its queries must be met with lies. Espionage, one must tautologously insist, is supposed to be covert. There are indeed questions, as that incident illustrated, about what sort of activity espionage is; what role it plays in national security; and what sorts of games, in the name of national security, are played between nations. But one thing that is clear is that so long as there are such activities, the more the right to know is insisted upon, the thicker the web of even domestic deceit must become.
A more trivial case, but with some similar lessons, is that of politicians’ private lives. Ms. Bok says that if politicians are subjected to improper inquiries about their private lives, they may withhold information, but should not lie. This is pious and unrealistic. It depends on the practices of the media, and on how the right to know is concretely interpreted, whether there even exists an option of merely withholding information. If the popular Press is at once insistent, slovenly, sensationalist, stupid and contemptuous, as in Great Britain, the well known may find that the only alternatives to lying about their private life may be those of having no reputation or having no private life.
This small area illustrates the general, and indeed obvious, point that the morality, and the necessity, of lying must always be a function of at least two other things: the nature, including the morality, of what is truly being done, and the kind of information that is being demanded, including the question of what it will mean by the time it reaches its destination. American politics has traditionally subscribed to the belief that the best way to secure right action and honest politicians is to make politicians and other public agents accountable under conditions of maximum popular investigation. At the same time, however, and as firmly, Americans have believed that their politicians are dishonest, and would be even more so if not pursued by the right to know. But the same ideas can be turned round to yield a different result: if there were less faith that politics could be an entirely open business, perhaps politicians would not need to be so dishonest.
It is not merely that Ms. Bok’s book suffers from an excessive confidence that the institutions which express the right to know can never conflict with the demand for public honesty. She tends also to overlook the role of institutions altogether, and to make the unpolitical assumption that what is principally needed to make political life better is more morality in it. There can be no doubt that it makes some difference what the moral character of politicians is. But beyond that, almost every question is open. There are questions of what institutions select for what kind of character, and of the extent to which the structures of power encourage politicians to exert moral pressure on each other. There are also questions about the variety of moral character that in given circumstances is most desirable. Ms. Bok more or less assumes, I think, that what is more desirable in rulers is a righteous character, and a scrupulous concern for principle. But I doubt that a Kantian Cabinet is really what we want; a certain honourable cynicism (though it is not all that we need) may serve better, for much of the time, to keep us out of the mud.
Ms. Bok should have been more impressed by Machiavelli’s question, whether, granted the world as it is, politicians can keep us out of the mud if they altogether refuse to get into it themselves. Rulers who do not have to do nasty things are not simply the cause of an acceptable social order—they are also something to be achieved by it.
Note
1. Lying: Moral Choice in Public and Private Life, by Sissela Bok (Harvester Press, 1978).
Logic and Society and Ulysses and the Sirens, by Jon Elster
There are some pieces of logical or theoretical jargon which are marks of ideological allegiance—intellectual wind-socks to display which way the wind is blowing the author. While linguistic philosophers, at least of the older sort, ‘analyse’ some intellectual object, structuralists and their neighbours ‘deconstruct’ it. For Marxists, a set of interrelated problems is usually ‘problematic’; and what gives rise to their problematic, is involved in it, and needs to be overcome, is, standardly, ‘a contradiction’, where that is not something in their or someone else’s discourse, but an objective state of the world.
Logicians characteristically hate this use of the word ‘contradiction’, something which, they will insist, applies only to words or to thought: not, certainly, to the world. Even when the term is applied to actions or social states, items which at least embody or express thought, they will prefer to say something else, and speak of ‘conflict’, for instance, or practical impossibility.
The idea of contradiction which is not just an affliction of thought but is something real in the world, and which has to be overcome by progress or in thought or action, is due to Hegel, a fact which itself does not recommend it to the logicians. Great lengths of Hegel’s work indeed go under the title ‘Logic’, but little of it belongs to that science which was developed by Aristotle, the Scholastics, Frege, Russell and many hundreds of current practitioners who work in Schools of Philosophy, Linguistics, Mathematics or Economics. Among the many things that Hegel understood, logic in that sense—that is to say, the real sense—was not one. His unwieldy, slithering notions of contradiction and negation were included in his legacy to dialectical materialism, and some very dreadful and obfuscatory rot by Engels or Plekhanov, in which the corn negates the seed and so on, is owed directly or indirectly to him.
All that may be thrown away, and only the demands of religious observance could want it kept. But along with it, logicians and their natural philosophical allies characteristically throw out an entire dimension of social, political and psychological thought: a dimension which was among the many things Hegel understood, and which, indeed—so far as such a thing can ever be true of anyone—he invented: ‘Contradiction’ is a property of thought, and the attempts to apply it to the cornfield can be forgotten. But it does not follow from that that it is an affliction only of descriptive thought: it can apply also to social or individual projects or attitudes. It is not very helpful to extend it to any kind of conflict whatsoever. Conflicts of interest between peasants and workers do not in themselves constitute a contradiction: though some political project may involve genuinely a contradiction if it essentially involves having to satisfy both of two sets of interests which are essentially opposed to one another.
A policy, a social situation, a frame of mind, can involve contradiction in this way if it necessarily involves objective or other kinds of thought which are necessarily irreconcilable. Thus, in Hegel’s most famous and influential example, the master wants from the slave something he necessarily cannot have—‘unilateral recognition’, as Elster puts it in Logic and Society, a recognition freely accorded to him by someone who is a chattel, who cannot freely recognise anyone. This state of consciousness is essential to the master, and implicit in the historical forms that his institution takes.
There is nothing in all this inconsistent with real logic. In fact, however, the philosophers who live most intimately with real logic have not had much interest in these ideas, as Sartre’s existentialism did, or some forms of phenomenology, or, of course, Marxism. There are many reasons for this: most superficially, the dubious associations I have already mentioned of the profligate use of ‘contradiction’; more seriously, genuine difficulties, which indeed need investigation, as to the ways in which a particular thought form (a ‘consciousness’, as Hegel put it), or again a self-defeating project, can be necessarily involved in or presupposed by a social relationship or other historically-given development. Hegel had one big dark answer to that question; Marxists have lots of active answers, but they tend to scurry off when disturbed. That fact—together, of course, with the mere fact that the whole business has anything to do with Marxism at all—tends to keep the logicians away. A similar neglect is shown by the economic or social scientific theorists of rational behaviour. They are concerned with some kinds of logical difficulty which strategic thought can encounter: but their formal theories are characteristically too tied to simple conceptions of Utilitarian rationality, and their range of psychological and social reference is too narrow, for them to make much contact with this range of problem, grounded as it usually is in complex historical and psychological materials.
Jon Elster, in his brilliant, inventive, mercurial books of essays (as they both are, though only the second professes it), encourages these various parties to come and look at each other, and generates enough quick-fire excitement to make some of them surely want to do so.1 His versatility suits the needs of the case. He is a Norwegian, and, by affiliation, a Professor of History. He is a totally idiomatic writer, further, in both English and French and perhaps other languages as well. He obviously knows a lot of mathematical logic, economics, political science and formal decision theory. He quotes in an unforced and relevant way from Donne, Stendhal, Emily Dickinson and Groucho Marx, to name a few; about the last he remarks that his famous dictum, ‘I would not dream of belonging to a club which would have me as a member,’ is a reversal of the Master-Slave paradox, and that it was indeed he who stood Hegel on his head.
Elster can overdo it, and a section of Ulysses about the paradoxes of love betrays, in a memorable phrase of Professor John Findlay, the rattle of machinery. He is also systematically infuriating, because his method in both books is to start questions and not to answer them; to throw out one or two good ideas, not to develop a thesis or sustain an argument for very long. He is interested in the vocabulary of discussions and the ways in which concepts can be put to use in various directions, rather than in solving any given problem. The effect is rather bad for the nerves: in terms which might be appropriate to his own style of paradox, it is like a brisk meditation. Yet it is very clever and inventive, and wonderfully clear; and brings the powerful instruments of modern logic to a rich range of social and psychological issues.
The issue of social contradiction and self-defeating projects occurs in both the books. Logic and Society considers more generally the application of logical notion to social description: the logic of possibility, for instance, as applied to politics, or the logic of ‘counterfactual history’, the activity of considering, for instance, how the USA might have developed without the railway, or the South without slavery (both actual projects of Robert Fogel), a style of thought which seems bafflingly indeterminate yet at the same time is closely associated with causal claims in history which most people want to be able to make. These topics both get pretty short treatment compared with the central topic of ‘counter-finality’, the phenomenon of projects which are doomed to defeat themselves, as Marx believed the processes of capitalist development were bound to do. Elster is good both about the logical structure of such processes and about the various ways in which they have been related to historical development.
Ulysses and the Sirens mainly concerns the rich subject of rational strategies to deal with partial irrationality. The paradigm, revealed in the title, is that of binding oneself so that one will not be able to do things which one foresees oneself doing for bad reasons. Although Elster proceeds, as always, at a cracking pace, there is a lot of insight as well as brilliance in his discussions of this and related subjects. He is particularly good about the phenomenon of ‘time preference’—that is to say, the fact that we characteristically attach more value to the sooner than to the later: a fact which is nervously repudiated by many philosophers, decision theorists, and (in so far as they are not the same people) evangelists of capitalist accumulation.
Besides his formal skills and his vast reading, Elster can bring to these subjects flashes of a distinct historical and political shrewdness. Logic and Society contains, in the middle of a fairly formal discussion of political possibility, some very suggestive remarks about Lenin, Rosa Luxemburg, and the theory of the ‘necessary failure’, in the sense of a failure which is indispensable to the success of the cause.
At three or four points in these books, there are hints of an extremely important idea: that directed and rational practical thought, whether in politics or in individual life—the rehearsing of possibilities, calculation of probabilities, devising alternatives—must for theoretical as well as practical reasons have a limit. This is not just because time or information runs out, but because there are necessary ambivalences of reason which can only be resolved by action rather than by further thought. To the extent that it is indeed a theoretical necessity, this will be a further point at which logical structure and social reality meet one another at some depth. It is one of several which Elster’s plumb-line has touched in his rapid voyage. Let us hope that he will slow down his ship and survey in greater detail these underwater structures of social thought and action.
Note
1. Logic and Society, by Jon Elster (Wiley, 1978), and Ulysses and the Sirens, by Jon Elster (Cambridge University Press, 1979).
The Culture of Narcissism, by Christopher Lasch; Nihilism and Culture, by Johan Goudsblom
All around him in American society Lasch sees intellectual and moral feebleness, cultural decay, despair and inner rage.1 There is no personal love, only a snatching at gratification, or domestic skirmishes in the war of all against all. There is no politics, only manipulation; no radical protest, only street theatre; no education, only organised illiteracy. The ‘élitism’ of earlier educational functions has been purged—by robbing the educational process of content. Sport is corrupted into mass entertainment. Therapy has replaced genuine moral reflection, and superstition has replaced genuine therapy.
This jeremiad is illustrated with many well-chosen and sometimes amazing examples of what Lasch detests. He treats some subjects with insight and an effectively energetic indignation; sport is especially well handled, perhaps because it is a rather less familiar theme for articulate cultural critics. But this is an unrelenting and repetitious harangue, with very little effective claim to explain anything, and its considerable success in the United States must surely owe something to its resemblance to the traditional minatory sermon, where the orator’s words furnished the Calvinistic thrill of seeming to reach into one’s own social and moral condition. In this case, however, they do not reach very far. In its attempt to give instant enlightenment about the deepest ills of American society, the book is—to a degree of which Lasch seems surprisingly unaware—an example of its own subject. At the same time, it is a replay of what is, in fact, a very old theme.
Since America has been a modern state, its decay has exercised its moralists. This nostalgia has by no means always had the 18th-century condition of America as its object, but almost always, like so much else in American culture, it has been an expression of 18th-century ideas. This has been particularly true when the resources of primitivism have been deployed, when the idea has been expressed that in some less sophisticated or less complex state of affairs things were—as perhaps they might be again—less dreadful than they are now. Among views of this kind historians of ideas have distinguished in the 18th century a ‘hard’ and a ‘soft’ primitivism, two different celebrations of the Noble Savage. The first, and more familiar, stands for rugged independence, simplicity of taste, loyalty, family virtue, and hardness of body and temper. Soft primitivism, a more socially threatening ideology, was encouraged by early reports from Tahiti, and pictured the uncorrupted state of things in terms of relaxation, gentle plenty, and an entirely amiable promiscuity.
These images have confronted one another in America within the last fifteen years: largely unchanged, except that the hard image has been brought nearer home, to the supposed history of America itself, while the soft image, in the fantasies of flower children and various religionists of pleasure, has been to some degree detached from falsehoods about the South Seas and projected into an accessible alternative culture: one in which, as Lasch points out in his discussion of such faiths, religious discovery and liberation are seen in terms of a technology.
Lasch is assuredly no soft primitivist—and he is not, strictly speaking, a hard one either, since what he sees as lost in contemporary America is a sophisticated urban style of culture, and not the qualities displayed within the ring of ox-waggons. Yet I suspect there is a lot of what he says which speaks to the same sense of loss as that touched by those who pine for a tougher past. Images of hardness, strength, and resistance to elementary oral gratification, run through his book: they are, in fact, largely what holds it together. What is supposed to hold it together is Lasch’s use of the concept of narcissism. There is a certain amount of psychoanalytical discussion which describes in theoretical terms a special kind of character: insecure, dependent on others for self-respect, subject to grandiose images of the self, and filled with anger. This character Lasch explores to some effect: bringing out, for instance, the fact that its baseless self-glorification is quite different from a proper fostering of self, and deftly eliciting its ‘secondary characteristics’: ‘pseudo self-insight, calculating seductiveness, nervous self-deprecating humour’. The total embodiment of modern narcissistic America is, Lasch suggests, Woody Allen.
This account of a kind of character, with its psychoanalytical formulation, offers a good number of suggestions. But it really does little to sustain Lasch’s cultural critique. For this critique to be sustained, a link would be needed between the psychological description and some significant feature of present American society; and since the basic contrast is between the way things are and the way things used to be, some historical understanding is needed of relevant changes in American society. So far as I can discover, there is just one attempt at such an explanation, on page 176: ‘The psychological patterns associated with pathological narcissism, which in less exaggerated form manifest themselves in so many patterns of American culture … originate in the peculiar structure of the American family, which in turn originates in changing modes of production.’ (The radically—or merely historically—disposed reader brightens up.) ‘Industrial production takes the father out of the home and diminishes the role that he plays in the conscious life of the child.’ That is all. The account then goes on to explain how the mother cannot compensate for this, because of various weaknesses which are themselves part of what has to be explained.
Besides that hopeful reference to changing modes of production, there are various other signals in the book to indicate that Lasch is not merely—what he seems a good deal of the time—a disgruntled, though bright conservative. His lament over the decline of the work ethic also includes sneers at the work ethic, and his celebration, as against narcissism, of what are plainly bourgeois virtues tends to steer clear of their association with the bourgeoisie. In the last section of the book, Lasch admits that ‘the conservative critique of bureaucracy superficially resembles the radical critique outlined in the present study.’ He says that this resemblance is only superficial, on the ground, clearly correct in itself, that conservatives have a mythological view of the role of individualism in capitalist business. The content of his own radicalism, however, fizzles out in a sentence or two of almost Bennite vacuity about citizens having to create their own ‘communities of competence’.
Lasch’s complaints suggest no genuine explanation; more generally, for all his admirable concern about preserving a sense of the past, they lack any sense of historical structure. It is no good his just saying that his critique is ‘radical’: unless his account gives some historical meaning to present discontents, it is neither radical nor reactionary, but merely a complaint about present discontents.
This absence of any historical theory, which makes Lasch difficult to distinguish from any nostalgic malcontent of any period, leaves an obscurity over a question which must be central for any critique of modern culture: whether modernity is to be seen as a special category, and modern discontent as unprecedented. Of course, any set of discontents is going to be unprecedented if taken concretely enough: the question is whether the modern world is seen as presenting a crisis—it may also be an opportunity—radically different from anything in past history. Hegel and Marx, of course, took this to be so, and both associated the promise, as well as the distinctive character, of modern culture with its unparalleled degree of self-consciousness. It is a line of thought which lies behind Lasch’s discussion, but it is one which he does not confront. If he had confronted it, he would also have faced the very real question whether, if one accepts that idea, one agrees with the ultimately optimistic interpretations of the phenomenon that Marx and Hegel gave, or sees it as bringing the destruction of European (and American) culture—a return to darkness, or a move to some state of society for which reflective self-consciousness will not be the value that it has been for us.
And here again I touch on my problem, on our problem, my unknown friends (for as yet I know of no friend): what meaning would our whole being possess if it were not this, that in us the will to truth becomes conscious of itself as a problem?
As the will to truth acquires self-consciousness—there can be no doubt of that—morality will gradually perish now: this is the great spectacle in a hundred acts reserved for the next two centuries in Europe—the most terrible, the most questionable, and perhaps also the most helpful of all spectacles.
This, needless to say, is Nietzsche, quoted in Johan Goudsblom’s clear, learned and useful book, which was published in Holland in 1960 and has only now, with revisions, been translated into English.2 It charts the development of nihilism, defined in the sense which Nietzsche gave to the word, and in terms of which he invented, in effect, the contemporary problem of nihilism: ‘A nihilist is a man who judges of the world as it is that it ought not to be, and of the world as it ought to be that it does not exist. According to this view, our existence (action, suffering, willing, feeling) has no meaning: the pathos of “in vain” is the nihilists’ pathos—at the same time, as pathos, an inconsistency on the part of the nihilists.’ The problem lies in the fact that our culture is importantly devoted to the Socratic demand of the ‘truth imperative’ with regard to both ‘being and well being’, as the translators handily put it, and refuses to base action or a way of life on anything less than some absolute truth: at the same time, we acknowledge both that there are no such truths to be had, and that the very consciousness which makes that clear can make it at the same time harder to do without them. Nietzsche again: ‘However, the tragedy is that one cannot believe these dogmas of religion and metaphysics if one has the strict method of truth in one’s heart and in one’s head, whilst on the other hand one has become so tender, so sensitive and so agonised through the development of mankind that one needs remedies and consolations of the most supreme type; this gives rise to the danger of man’s bleeding to death from acknowledged truth … ’
Not all of Goudsblom’s book is about Nietzsche. The parts that are stand up better than much writing about Nietzsche to the danger of having the rest of one’s text discredited by the power of the quotations, and they provide a persuasive account of centrally important aspects of his thought. There is some rather pedestrian history of philosophy in the book—the truth imperative through the centuries—but, in general, under a modest and steady manner, Goudsblom skilfully shapes substantive and illuminating information about nihilism, and makes it clear that both the ‘truth imperative’ itself and scepticism about our ability to satisfy it are cultural and not merely theoretical forces.
At the extremes of his prophetic disgust, Nietzsche did not foresee the precise deformations of social and personal life that Lasch holds up for castigation. But it may be that he understood a great deal about their structure. Was he right in his basic reaction—that the fault must lie with the Socratic aspiration towards moral truth and reflexive understanding? And if so, is there any way of overcoming that drive to ever greater self-consciousness without invoking a catastrophe? These questions are more pressing than ever.
Notes
1. The Culture of Narcissism, by Christopher Lasch (Norton, 1979).
2. Nihilism and Culture, by Johan Goudsblom (Blackwell, 1980).
Religion and Public Doctrine in England, by Maurice Cowling
This peculiar book belongs to a series called ‘Cambridge Studies in the History and Theory of Politics’, but one should not be misled by the name either of the series or of the book: there is very little about the history of politics and nothing about its theory, and not much direct light is thrown on the subject of the title.1 Cambridge, however, it very much is. The acerbic parochialism, dislike of the modern world and its cultural effects, a distinct sense of Englishness, indeed put one in mind, oddly enough, of another Cambridge writer, the late Dr Leavis, as do some turgid writing and a violent dislike of Lord Snow. Oddly, since Leavis’s intense moralism is the sort of thing that Cowling most detests: but that only makes it clearer how some spirit of the place managed to affect them both.
Leavis is not mentioned in these pages, but many Cambridge figures, past and present, are. The author relishes the utter inconspicuousness of some of them, and their parochial preoccupations. Welbourne, Smyth and B. L. Manning (author of a chapter on ‘What the Boat Club owes to the College’) all receive considered treatment, alongside better-known historians, and figures such as Whitehead, Toynbee, Eliot, Churchill and Evelyn Waugh. ‘It was not until it began to be said in Jesus that Peterhouse was willing to get rid of Knowles that Butterfield was in a position to persuade Vellacott that Peterhouse had a duty to keep him,’ writes Cowling with relish, and we know where we are.
The parochialism is partly related to an autobiographical intent: the author wishes to introduce us to the formation of his own opinions. However, this is a recessive note, and it comes out rather oddly because the most explicit autobiography occurs in the Preface, in which, by some obscure authorial convention, Cowling always refers to himself in the third person. ‘For as long as he can remember the author has hated these modes of thinking,’ he rather grandly says in the course of it. It must be said that what precedes this remark is not so much an account of any modes of thinking as a list of names (including, I should no doubt declare, my own), and that this sets the tone for quite a lot of what happens later.
Cowling’s idea is to mark out a certain set of dislikes, opinions and attitudes, both by the intermittent element of autobiography, and by an account and assessment of these various writers. The treatment of them is very uneven and often very blank, particularly because so much of it takes the form of fragmented quotations from their writings. The device of quotation and semi-quotation has a function, and allows Cowling to sustain an ambiguous relation to what he is reporting. We shall come back to that. Merely stylistically, it has a deadening effect, particularly when Cowling is trying to deal with philosophical rather than historical writings: the account of Whitehead, for instance, and in good part that of Collingwood, are about as appealing and lifelike as a police photo-montage of a wanted man.
All these writers, and the teachings of the forgotten dons, whether favourably or unfavourably treated, bear on the question of how the modern world should be viewed in the light of the religious consciousness; and the answer is that, at any rate, it should not be viewed as it usually is—within the pious and fraudulent constraints of liberal and humanist preoccupations. ‘How shall we sing the Lord’s song in a strange land?’ was the title, mentioned by Cowling, of a sermon by Owen Chadwick, Regius Professor of History at Cambridge, and the object of some of Cowling’s more condescending comments. In view of the prominent confessional stance that Cowling has chosen to take in this book, the question presses heavily on Cowling himself.
His colleague Edward Norman, who recently voiced in his Reith Lectures prejudices similar to Cowling’s, is criticised for the ‘wavering and inadequate expression that he gives to his conception of the Church of England’, and it is said that he ‘is in danger of abandoning—perhaps wishes deliberately to abandon—the only claims that make it possible to believe that the Church of England is a Church.’ If the proprieties of Peterhouse permit it, Norman might point out that this is a bit thick from one who spends 450 pages in giving barely any idea of what these claims might be, or of the ways in which the Anglican embers might be kept glowing if not with the secularist hot air which he and Cowling jointly despise: Cowling may well reply that the second and ‘larger’ work which he promises will set out all these matters. If so, it will have a hard time.
At the end of this volume, at any rate, it is clear that Cowling’s thoughts, when they extract themselves from the activities of merely quoting, commenting and sneering, are in a state of such abject confusion, and his relation to what he believes is so evasive, that some special infusion of intellectual and spiritual grace will be needed for him to do better than Norman, or to feel his own situation more clearly.
Anglicanism seems indeed to be the preferred form of his ‘Christian conservatism’, and that certainly fits well with his praise of splenetic military men and cantankerous parsons. But the hints we are given of the sentiments at the heart of his religious attitude seem to suggest some different and darker associations—nearer the scepticism and distrust of all merely secular improvement which can be found in the unliberated heartland of the Church of Rome. If all that one’s religion offers is a sense of original sin, imperfectibility, and a recognition that eternity is ‘as significant as time’; if one joins to that a scathing dislike of all liberal improvement; and if one is prepared to say that ‘in face of the transcendence of God, no moral or political system has any authority, and more or less anything will do,’ then one needs some extra agency to keep one from immediate and close association with the more unreconstructed sort of cardinal.
Anglicanism has presumably offered in the past such an agency in the form of certain relations to and within society, ways of going on in a predominantly English style. No dogma or even image of religious truth adequately determines, in this tradition, the religious life: historical contingency, social ‘arbitrariness’ (one of Cowling’s favourite words), must give it substance. But the more that that is true, and the less that there is anything to work with other than what we historically and arbitrarily have, the less room Cowling or any other critic has to object to what we historically and arbitrarily have at any given time—for instance, now.
In a very brief epilogue to his book, Cowling says that Christian conservatism, for the moment, ‘most certainly in England, must primarily exist as dissent, a Jacobitism of the mind, which can do little more than protest its conviction that the modern mind is corrupt.’ But all minds, in Cowling’s lapsarian perspective, are corrupt. In order to show that the modern mind is in some peculiar way corrupt—and in a way of which he, and Christianity, and conservatism, are supposed to give us some improved understanding—he needs a more reflective, more open and less defensive conception of truth than any that he displays here, or indeed, I believe, possesses; and not only of truth, but of truthfulness.
One of Cowling’s objections to the liberal consciousness lies in its pretensions to objectivity, and in particular to historical objectivity. One of the things that the admired Canon Smyth is said to have ‘done’ ‘pedagogically’ is that he ‘implied’ ‘that academic detachment is nonsense and that all academic statements are shot through with prejudice, partiality, and persuasive intention.’ Objections to what is called ‘the constricting positivism of professional historical truth’—like enemies of liberalism to the left, Cowling uses ‘positivist’ as a fairly general term of abuse—yield a poorly defined relativism, about which we are told not much except that it is a necessary defence of religion. Concerning what he learnt from Sir Edwyn Hoskyns, he writes, in a passage which is fairly typical of this book’s prose: ‘But I do not think, in terms of emotional engagement (let alone in terms of religious practice), that I grasped the connection that Hoskyns was making between the religion he was protecting and the relativism that he was using to demolish the Liberalism he thought was eroding it.’ And of Toynbee, a special and early enemy, he says that he failed to see that ‘what is needed is the realisation that relativism subverts eclecticism, that irony protects religion, and that reactionary bloodiness is needed for survival.’
But if historical truth is relative, and religious truth either is totally remote from the world or is embodied in circumstances which are themselves relative and arbitrarily shaped, then it becomes utterly unclear, not merely what the exact objection to liberalism is, but why there is an objection at all. It has, after all, been rather successful, a point which Cowling in his rather unconvincing guise of defiant Jacobite is only too ready to make, and he has left himself with little alternative to being overwhelmingly impressed by that fact. Cowling’s own historical work mainly consists in illuminating the very small-scale politics of British history in this century by detailed use of quotations from documents, in a manner broadly unflattering to the motives of the agents involved. These studies, and the view of men and politics which is suggested by this book, hardly permit him any room for surprise that public life, particularly English public life, contains a high measure of humbug, and if that humbug is indeed effective, there is not much left, on Cowling’s own premises, for the knowing and disillusioned old warrior to do, except to straighten the medals on his shabby greatcoat and salute it.
Perhaps, at the end of the line, it is not any public inadequacy of liberalism which Cowling has the right to deplore, nor even a public deceitfulness, but rather that the high-minded propounders of liberal ideals, the self-satisfied advocates of ‘procrustean virtue’, as he occasionally puts it, are self-deceived. But, once more, if that implies, as it surely must, that they are blinded to the reality of the world, then we need a rather more adventurous and certainly less relativist account of the reality that they conceal from themselves.
Cowling’s posture, assumed with a self-conscious reticence, is one of realism, irony, courage, patience and withdrawn anger; and it implies, as against the liberal pieties, a style of personal truthfulness. It is, then, interesting to see what happens when Cowling gets near, for once, to an opinion which is indeed unacceptable in enlightened circles, which is more specific than his usual target of humanitarian claptrap in general, and which he himself residually suspects to be odious. Here his unheroic use of quotations can give itself away: a clear example is provided by what, in his discussion of Enoch Powell, he euphemistically calls the question of ‘immigration’.
In discussing immigration, Powell was careful not to express hostility to immigrants. In demanding a reduction in their numbers, he claimed to be defending their interests. He did not propose forcible repatriation, nor was his position a ‘racial’ one. He claimed simply that the national identity was in danger …
In the first sentence of this, Cowling is for once outside his usual hedge of quotation, and the robust commentator on this rough world immediately finds himself explaining, with an unction worthy of the purest liberal, what Powell was careful not to express, as opposed, presumably, to what his words were taken to express. In the next sentence, however, Powell only ‘claimed’ to be defending the immigrants’ interests, while, in the sentence after that, the word ‘racial’ collects a pair of quotes, the moral and intellectual force of which remains wonderfully unexplained. Finally, Powell turns out to have claimed ‘simply that the national identity was in danger’. That ‘simply’ is unambiguously Cowling’s, and it would be worth knowing in more forthright terms how simple a matter this sceptical historian of political behaviour takes ‘national identity’ to be.
There is nothing very remarkable in someone’s entertaining these opinions, and Cowling’s doing so is less important (as Cowling would certainly admit) than Powell’s. What is tiresome is the tone of heroic truthfulness with which Cowling throughout this book invests an undertaking of sustained equivocation: often, in an evasive relation to what he quotes, and all the time with an implied reliance on views of society, salvation and history which he smugly holds, rarely states and could not coherently defend.
Cowling seems to have the odd belief that (leaving aside the workers, who are thought to have got a number of things right) only he and the various reactionaries, famed or dim, whom he praises have noticed that much liberalism is optimistic and high-minded claptrap which carries its own intolerances, that survival needs irony, that values conflict, that most things in the world are determined by force and fraud, that political moralism is often self-indulgent, that progressivist utilitarianism is a barren creed. He should be better-informed: these things have got out, and many have noticed them. There are, however, two differences at least between others who have noticed these things, and Cowling. One difference is that some others regard these facts as part of the present historically-given problems of political thought and action, and in trying nevertheless to think and act, exercise that irony which Cowling so much commends—with the aim, for instance, of defending the conceptions of truth and objectivity which he himself both needs and despises. Cowling indeed admits that modernity has, in effect, to be accepted. It is merely superficial of him to suppose that those who equally ‘accept’ modernity, but instead of sitting in colleges writing clotted and ill-natured books, seek to shape its requirements in slightly better rather than worse directions, are necessarily victims of its more flatulent ideologies, or any less command the ‘toughness, subtlety and illusionlessness’ which he claims to use merely in living out the modern world.
Another difference is that those others may extend their lack of illusion to eternity, and to the supposed meanings provided by Christianity. It is indeed one of the oddest, and no doubt in this case consciously acknowledged, ironies of Cowling’s outlook that the ruthless critic of complacency should want, so it seems, to slump onto the dusty hassocks of an older Anglicanism. But I wonder, in fact, how far he does want that, or how far some larger irony may encompass that advocacy as well. The religion in question is so little defined, and its relation, even potential, to our society—that relation mentioned in the title of the book—is so underdetermined, that one may legitimately wonder how far it may not be the vehicle rather than the inspiration of Cowling’s rancour. His repeated claim is that irony is now necessary to Christianity: but it may merely be that the deployment of Christianity proves useful to sarcasm.
Note
1. Religion and Public Doctrine in England, by Maurice Cowling (Cambridge University Press, 1980).
Nietzsche on Tragedy, by M. S. Silk and J. P. Stern; Nietzsche: A Critical Life, by Ronald Hayman; Nietzsche, vol. 1, The Will to Power as Art, by Martin Heidegger
Nietzsche’s first book, The Birth of Tragedy, was published in 1872, when he was 27, and while he was a Professor of Classics at Basel. It had the unusual effect, for him, of attracting some attention at the time of its appearance: after that, Nietzsche’s writings virtually ceased to be noticed until the 1890s, by which time he was, for the last 11 years of his life, insane, virtually without speech, and out of touch with the world.
Nietzsche said to his sister that this book was a ‘centaur’, a description which emphasises its oddness, underestimates its beauty, and misleads about the number of its components, since it is a blend not only of scholarship and literary prose, but of philosophy and assertive aesthetic judgment. It makes some historical claims in answer to an old question, the origin of tragedy among the Greeks; more importantly, it tries to characterise the nature of the Greek view of the world, how that is expressed in Greek tragedy, and what significance both that view and those plays can now have.
According to Nietzsche, two contrasting spirits stand over Greek, and over all genuine, art—Apollo and Dionysus. Apollo represents order, civilisation and the determinate image; Dionysus represents nature, fertility, rapture, and the dissolution of individuation into collective expression. Greek tragedy was a highly stylised and formal art which arose nevertheless from the cult of Dionysus, and at its highest, in Nietzsche’s view, it represents a peculiar moment at which the forces of Apollo and Dionysus were balanced—a balance which expresses a heroic understanding and acceptance of the destructive horror of things, a ‘pessimism of strength’.
These elements, the Dionysiac and the Apollonian (a term surely preferable to Silk and Stern’s ‘Apolline’), by no means merely represent, as they are often taken to do, a dichotomy of passion and reason, or of emotion and form. The basic element of the Dionysiac is indeed Rausch—‘rapture’ in Krell’s translation of Heidegger, ‘ecstasy’ in Silk and Stern—but the corresponding idea of the Apollonian is dream, and the order which Classical art can set upon things itself has roots in a realm of illusion. The balance between these forces, and the consciousness which the tragic outlook involves of the unity of destructive and creative forces, was embodied only in the earlier period of the Greek Classical Age—above all, in the tragedians Aeschylus and Sophocles. Of these, Nietzsche tends to emphasise Aeschylus, who was indeed the earlier, but (as Silk and Stern point out) it is certainly Sophocles who most clearly and unpityingly embodies what Nietzsche had in mind.1
The third great tragedian, Euripides, destroyed tragedy, according to Nietzsche, or rather helped it to destroy itself, in association with the spirit of Socrates, that spirit of ‘Alexandrian optimism’ which trusted in reason to make the most basic questions of living into matters of discursive knowledge. That same rationalistic optimism led inevitably to a depreciation of art, including Plato’s celebrated rejection of it. The Platonic consciousness, and the later forms of moralism which in various ways Nietzsche assimilated to it, could not stand the power of tragedy, nor the metaphysical conclusion which, in The Birth of Tragedy, Nietzsche saw as implicit in tragedy: that ‘only as an aesthetic phenomenon can existence and the world be eternally justified.’
That conclusion, like other elements of his earlier thought, was a response to Schopenhauer. An admiring interest in this thinker was one of the things Nietzsche shared with Wagner, with whom, at the time of this book, his association was at its closest, though he was later to break it off, in a reaction of independence which was self-protective and entirely necessary. One of the many interesting facts in Hayman’s detailed and scholarly biography is that Nietzsche was present at the Wagner house on the famous occasion on Christmas Day 1870 when Richter and 15 musicians played on the staircase Wagner’s birthday offering to Cosima, the piece later to be known as the Siegfried Idyll.2 References to Wagner and to his art are present in The Birth of Tragedy, both in the salutation of Act Three of Tristan (a work which Nietzsche knew only from the piano score) as a modern embodiment of the tragic spirit, and, a good deal more problematically, in the form of echoing Wagner’s own hope that his art might be the focus of a national consciousness, in some way comparable to the spirit of the Dionysiac Festivals at which the tragedies were performed.
Silk and Stern, the one a Classical scholar, the other a Professor of German Literature who has already written a rewarding book on Nietzsche, have produced a joint commentary on this remarkable work, which gives a vast amount of background information and relevant comment. They tell of the traditionally German sense of exile, Heimweh, from the ancient world, and of a fascination with Greece which went back to the 18th century, in the form of an image which Nietzsche, more than any other single writer, was to destroy: that of an untroubled, serene world of Attic sunshine. They explain how the book came to be written, and the controversy which surrounded its appearance—in particular, the ferocious attack on it by a scholar younger than Nietzsche, later to become the most famous Classicist of his time, Ulrich von Wilamowitz-Möllendorff, whose savage pamphlet, often right about details and mostly wrong about the larger issues, may have helped to produce the fortunate effect of Nietzsche’s becoming a philosophical writer rather than remaining a philologist—though he was already set on that course before he published The Birth of Tragedy. Their commentary also provides information about such matters as the German understanding of tragedy; Nietzsche’s Classical scholarship as displayed in the book, and how that now appears; and what Nietzsche himself later came to think of it.
The composite authorship has probably contributed to the book’s being longer than it needs to be, and there are some sections of it—that on Aristotle’s Poetics, for instance, rarely an inspiring subject—which are distinctly dutiful. They have between them permitted a slightly schoolmasterly tone at times, both in summary of useful points, and also in some of their criticisms of Nietzsche: ‘Even here, we must admit, [Nietzsche] is liable to indulge his own inventive powers at the expense of his nominal subject.’ But many of the criticisms are well taken and the book judiciously offers (to those who can afford it) a great deal of useful information, organised round a wonderful subject. The only really mad assertion it contains, so far as I can see, is that in the operas of Mozart ‘music and drama merely alternate.’
In his last active years, Nietzsche came to take a poor view of much of The Birth of Tragedy. In 1886, he brought out an edition which had a new preface and a new subtitle. It was no longer The Birth of Tragedy from the Spirit of Music but The Birth of Tragedy: or Hellenism and Pessimism. The Preface was called ‘Attempt at a Self-Criticism’. To some degree, Nietzsche exaggerated the degree of his distance from the content of the book, which contained some of the most fundamental ideas of his later work, even though it is true that he had little use later for the contrast of the Apollonian and the Dionysiac, nor did he take any further great interest in drama. Much of the self-criticism of the Preface is, in a searching sense, stylistic: ‘Today I find it an impossible book: I consider it badly written, ponderous, embarrassing, image-mad and image-confused, sentimental, in places saccharine to the point of effeminacy, uneven in temper, lacking the will to logical exactitude, quite convinced and therefore disdainful of proof, mistrustful even of the propriety of proof, a book for initiates … ’ And the Wagnerian aspiration had gone: ‘Meanwhile I have learned to look without any hope or mercy on this “German spirit”, and also on contemporary German music, which is romanticism through and through, and which, apart from being the most un-Greek of all possible art-forms, is also a first-rate poison for the nerves, doubly dangerous for a nation which loves drink, and honours unclarity as a virtue … ’
Granted these remarks and many like them from Nietzsche’s later years, granted his attitude to pretentious obscurity and professorial self-importance, he really did not deserve Heidegger’s lectures on him. Heidegger offered four lecture courses on Nietzsche at the University of Freiburg-im-Breisgau between 1936 and 1940. The present volume is the first of four volumes in English translation to be published, and carries an analysis by the translator, who clearly knows a great deal about Heidegger, can nevertheless write clearly, and might well have extended himself beyond the very limited role that he has taken.3
These lectures are directed to the same area as The Birth of Tragedy, but they barely mention the work. In all these lectures, it seems, Heidegger took as his text a book called The Will to Power, which is, in fact, a collection of aphorisms and notes, of very different dates, which Nietzsche’s dreadful sister, the energetic anti-semite Elisabeth, put together from his Nachlass according to an outline—only one of many different such plans—which Nietzsche had written on one sheet of paper for a book of that title. The Will to Power is a deeply interesting and powerful collection of writings, but it is not really a book by Nietzsche at all, let alone his definitive work. The idea that that was what it was was propagated in the Thirties by Alfred Bäumler, who wrote postscripts to editions of Nietzsche’s work and was a Nazi. Heidegger, it must be said, honourably repudiates in this volume Bäumler’s Hitlerian interpretations, but he accepts Bäumler’s account of the nature of the book called The Will to Power; nor is there any correcting comment by Krell, although he refers to the English translation by Kaufmann and Hollingdale (Weidenfeld, 1968), where Kaufmann’s Preface sets out these matters in detail.
Heidegger has one or two interesting things to say—for instance, about the relations of Will and Power to Romanticism. He gives some suggestive interpretations, as when he suggests that Nietzsche’s claim of ‘philosophising with a hammer’ means, not smashing things, but to ‘tap all things with a hammer to hear whether or not they yield that familiar hollow sound’. Some other interpretations are interesting without being convincing, as when he says that Nietzsche’s claim that ‘we have art in order not to perish of the truth’ refers to supersensible or transcendental ‘truth’ of the kind falsely offered by optimistic Platonist philosophers—a version which seems precisely to take the edge off Nietzsche’s thought. Nietzsche did not remain satisfied with the redeeming power of art as expressed in The Birth of Tragedy, but that left him with the problem which the formulation had tried to answer—of the relations between the power of art and the demands, if not of truth, at least of truthfulness. Heidegger discusses at length what Nietzsche called the ‘holy dread of the discordance of art and truth’—but only, so it seems to me, to disappear, when the going gets tough, into abstract nouns and gnomic metaphysical evasion.
Heidegger is the only world-famous philosopher of the 20th century about whom it can seriously be argued that he was a charlatan, not because he is obscure, but because it can seem that his obscurity is functional, and that his characteristic combination of an abstract metaphysical terminology with homely domestic metaphor (so that things ‘stand in the clearing of Being’ or such) is not a necessity born of the unequalled depth of his inquiry—something to which he insistently refers—but a purposive substitute for thought which in more perspicuous modes is harder. I genuinely do not know whether such critics are right, but these lectures at least, less densely written and so in some ways more revealing than his more finished publications, do little to disarm them.
There are passages, some quite long, about the history of philosophy, in particular about Plato, which are sometimes utterly dull and banal, and sometimes simply inaccurate: often past writers are tacitly bent to a Heideggerian purpose, ‘a philosophy for initiates’. His use of ‘therefore’ startlingly ‘lacks the will to logical exactitude’: indeed, most of his discursively presented arguments are the dialectical equivalent (to adapt a phrase of Wittgenstein’s), not of a clock that tells the time wrongly, but of a heap of junk. Perhaps that was his intention—to provide an affronting propaedeutic to real, non-discursive, philosophy. Heidegger’s work on Nietzsche has been influential, particularly in France, but to me these lectures seem to do no good to the understanding of Nietzsche, nor to gain anything from it, but mainly to be a hideous example of several things that Nietzsche explicitly and rightly hated.
It is certain, even if not everyone has yet come to see it, that Nietzsche was the greatest moral philosopher of the past century. This was, above all, because he saw how totally problematical morality, as understood over many centuries, has become, and how complex a reaction that fact, when fully understood, requires. To help himself to understand it, he resourcefully explored, in twenty years of increasingly hectic activity, our feelings about art, guilt, violence, honesty, and indeed every element of that moral consciousness which the Greeks helped to invent.
It is not easy to write a book about Nietzsche. Two of the present books succeed, one as a learned and critical commentary on one special work, the other by offering great biographical learning and only modest philosophical ambitions. Heidegger in this volume does not display much learning, and no one can ever have supposed that his philosophical ambitions were modest. But above all it is in its style, in its lack of light and its dire assertiveness, that it shows no sign of having grasped the demands that Nietzsche managed to impose on anyone wanting to write about him, or about the subjects that he transformed.
Notes
1. Nietzsche on Tragedy, by M. S. Silk and J. P. Stern (Cambridge University Press, 1981).
2. Nietzsche: A Critical Life, by Ronald Hayman (Weidenfeld and Nicolson, 1980).
3. Nietzsche, vol. 1, The Will to Power as Art, by Martin Heidegger, translated by David Farrell Krell (Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1981).
After Virtue: A Study in Moral Theory, by Alasdair MacIntyre
MacIntyre’s brilliant and deeply interesting book starts from a truth which is, as he says, not as obvious as some of its effects—that modern morality is in a mess.1 The mess does not consist simply in the fact that there are many moral conflicts which we find it difficult to resolve. The point is rather that there are no agreed ways of thinking about these conflicts, so that claims of justice, for instance, stand in blank opposition to claims based on utility and welfare, and we do not know how to weigh arguments in terms of what people deserve or need against considerations of general happiness. Indeed, we do not even know how to think straight about what they deserve or need.
MacIntyre’s explanation of this is that we are surrounded by disconnected fragments of a previously working morality, which has been progressively deprived of sense by the demands of modern society and its impersonal organisation. Such a society offers an intolerable opposition between a bureaucratic and technical world on the one hand, and mere privacy, the world of the individual, on the other. This encourages us to think of ourselves, in relation to morality, in purely individualist terms, and as not essentially related to any social structure or institutional duties. This utterly abstract picture of the moral self is shared by analytical philosophy, by Sartre, and by many social scientists. It is in fact only a reflection of our alienated social condition.
The only choice now left to us, MacIntyre claims, is between Aristotle and Nietzsche. The latter discovered the historical collapse of traditional substantial conceptions of morality, and was prepared to face the consequences (or some of the consequences) of there being no coherent basis to moral thought. If we do not accept that, we must try to reconstruct morality on the kind of basis offered by Aristotle, according to which the virtues constitute the central notion.
MacIntyre opts for Aristotle. He gives some account of how virtues relate to rules of society, and sketches foundations for a morality grounded in the virtues, by using the three notions of “a practice,” “a narrative order” (which can constitute a whole human life), and “a moral tradition” which allows room for conflict and criticism. This new Aristotelianism will be free, he hopes, from defects which he rightly points out in Aristotle’s own theory—for instance, that it implausibly implies that you cannot have any one virtue unless you have all of them.
Aristotle himself, of course, essentially connected morality and politics: the proper life for man can be lived only in a proper society. MacIntyre deeply agrees, and this is indeed one of his major claims; but at the same time he regards the situation of modern society as so hopeless that the new morality can be lived, for the time being, only on a private scale (it seems), and the book ends with a few brief and bewildering remarks in favour of St Benedict and Trotsky, offered so desultorily as to suggest that, as he wrote them, MacIntyre was packing to depart.
Much of MacIntyre’s construction goes by very fast indeed, and one repeatedly wants to stop it with questions. But the feeling is sustained that one’s question would get an interesting answer. Sometimes the jumps in the argument leave one with too little grasp even on what the theory is supposed to effect: I find this so with the treatment of narrative structure, where the relations of fiction to reality, and of prospective decisions to retrospection, remain firmly hidden in dazzling light.
The book is in fact a collection of highly suggestive pieces which are sometimes skilfully juxtaposed rather than connected by argument. One piece is particularly thinly connected to the rest. This treats the well-worn theme of the scientific unpredictability of social developments. It is supposed to earn its place by undermining claims made by managers to legitimate power in modern society in virtue of their powers of bureaucratic control, but it cannot possibly do this, since MacIntyre’s own argument allows—it may indeed require—that there is such a thing as successful bureaucratic control, and all the argument can show is that it is not grounded in scientific prediction.
Some aspects of MacIntyre’s diagnosis, and of his reconstruction, are, of course, not entirely new. It is surprising that he does not refer, among recent writers, to Charles Taylor, for instance, who in his book on Hegel (a writer himself neglected by MacIntyre) and elsewhere has expressed similar concerns. But After Virtue is still an original, as well as a compelling and imaginative book, and the major doubts that it raises are doubts on major issues. Much of MacIntyre’s accounts of the virtues, and his claim that modern moral thought is deeply in a mess in a way that current philosophy is not equipped to understand, are surely correct.
But I find it hard to believe his historical diagnosis. Above all, it is surely not merely an effect of alienated modern society that we have the conception of a pure moral self which, abstracted from all social institutions, is able to stand back from, accept or reject any proposed pattern of affections or allegiances. On the contrary, this is an idea which has recurred in different forms at various points in the history of morality, in Plato and in certain forms of Christianity as well as in Kant. It itself represents, in fact, a certain moral demand—a demand of justice, that one should lay aside, in the search for ultimate moral worth, the determinations of society. What value you possess, it suggests, cannot ultimately depend on where, or who, in what social conditions, you were born.
Aristotle indeed does not have that idea; but it is not that the world in his time had not yet faced that demand, but that he seems to have forgotten it. Similarly, he seems to have forgotten the problem about vindicating morality against egoism, a problem which MacIntyre very oddly displaces to the 18th century, although it was manifestly faced by Plato and by Socrates at the very beginning of the Western tradition.
In its historical aspects, MacIntyre’s account is a brilliant nostalgic fantasy. What we have now is not so much the collapse of a fine Aristotelian tradition under the deformations of the modern world, but rather the outcome, under those modern pressures, of faults which have always existed in the Western moral consciousness. If, at our present juncture, we do have to choose between Aristotle and Nietzsche, it may rather be Nietzsche who is right: it has finally got out that there is something wrong with morality. But it is itself one of MacIntyre’s most illuminating exaggerations to claim that this is the only choice that we have.
Note
1. After Virtue: A Study in Moral Theory, by Alasdair MacIntyre (Duckworth, 1981).
Philosophical Explanations, by Robert Nozick
Toward the end of his talented, diverse, and very long book, Robert Nozick embraces the idea of philosophy as an art form, and of the philosopher as a literary creator who works with ideas.1 This reinforces an idea that may have already occurred to the reader; if this book is in some way like a literary work, it is clear what kind of literary work it is like.
Nozick, when young, wrote several articles of startling brilliance, originality, and, in some cases, formidable technical resource, in such fields as the formal discipline of decision theory. He then produced the notorious Anarchy, State, and Utopia, a lengthy book which advocated individual rights, libertarianism, and a minimal state; attacked public welfare; discouraged redistributive social justice; and represented taxation as forced labor. It was very clever and not very pious, and gave a distinct impression of hard-talking heartlessness (though the genuinely heartless publicists of the right who welcomed it as a philosophical liberation failed to notice that Nozick was committed, most probably, to believing that most of America belongs to the Indians).
After the hard, scandalous success we should not be too surprised to find now a book that has deeper and more spiritual ambitions, which covers many large traditional subjects, and which devotes the same outstanding talents not just to solving puzzles or showing off, and not at all to slamming the pious, but to reaching toward more speculative and awesome reflections on the meaning of life. This is Philosophical Explanations. It is an attempt at the Great American Novel of philosophy.
Like most other such attempts, it fails. It is an extraordinary mixture. In part, it is as brilliant and exciting as anything in contemporary philosophy. Quite often it is suggestive and interesting. Sometimes it is very bad, and at moments it is so deeply awful that it is only by considering the Great American Novel syndrome that one can see how it came about. A feature of that syndrome is the disposition to take the size of the attempt for success itself. That can affect readers as well as the writer. Many large things have already been said about this book by commentators. One is that it introduces new philosophical techniques, and is likely to influence the way in which philosophy is done.
Nozick does offer some claims to a distinctive method, but he sensibly makes much less of his originality in this respect than the commentators do. The idea, borne by his title, is that philosophy should try to explain things, rather than offer proofs. It is not altogether clear what he means by this distinction. He wants to avoid “coercing” people with attempted proofs to inescapable conclusions; he does not want to proceed by rigorous deduction from self-evident premises. But it is not obvious how that aim is related to offering explanations: some explanations (some mathematical ones, for instance) themselves proceed in that way. He recommends something else again when he tells us to proceed in a tentative rather than a dogmatic spirit—there can be tentative suggestions of proofs, and there can be dogmatic explanations. Nor is any of this the same as the aspiration, which he also expresses, to make a philosophical work that is more like the many-columned Parthenon than like a tall, thin tower, so that when bits fall down, as they will, something of beauty may be left. That analogy poses the question, not whether the work consists of proofs, but whether it all consists of one proof.
One kind of thing Nozick’s various distinctions do exclude: a philosophical work that tries to deduce all its conclusions from a few axioms. That is excluded, but then virtually no philosophy has been like that. Spinoza claims to have done that in his Ethics, but no one believes him. At the very beginning of Western philosophy, Parmenides’ poem (or half of it) may have tried to do that, but it is hard to tell from its ruins—except that they seem more like the ruins of a temple than of a tower.
In fact, almost all past philosophy has consisted of explanations, and has been known by its authors to do so. Plato’s did, and the word aitia, the Greek for “explanation,” is closely associated with its most notorious speculative construct, the Theory of Forms. Aristotle was obsessionally explicit in offering explanations. Even the rationalist Descartes can be seen as, much of the time, explaining—and he was aware, in the case of physics (at least), of something to which Nozick draws attention, the power of explanations that one knows to be untrue. Kant was centrally engaged in explanation: explaining, as Nozick reminds us, how something can be so (for instance, that every event must have a cause), but also, and very illuminatingly, how we can seem to be forced to believe things that are absurd or impossible. Kant and other philosophers, such as Wittgenstein, have believed something that Nozick mentions but does not in fact attend to very much in this book: that a good philosophical explanation, insofar as it corrects everyday belief, carries with it an explanation also of error, and of why incorrect everyday belief should seem true.
There are perhaps two distinctive things that Nozick particularly has in mind in emphasizing explanation as against “coercive” proof. He is telling us, for one thing, that philosophers should entertain ideas in a patient and imaginative manner, and not treat them, or those who offer them, as the local heavies in a Western movie treat the stranger in town. It is not the most creative approach in philosophy to shoot an idea out of someone’s hand as soon as he picks it up. Here Nozick’s conclusion is fine and good. Not everyone needs to be told it.
The second thing that Nozick encourages goes further and is less good. This—which emerges much more in the later part of the book, about value—is the idea that a philosophical conception recommends itself if, as well as fitting a number of our spontaneous practices of thought and feeling, it would be nice if it were true. At times, Nozick starts at quite a distance from the facts and constructs a model of how things might be, the main point of which seems to be that the world would be a better and less squalid place if that were how things turned out to be. Thus he offers a picture in which we have a dignity that lies in possessing genuine free will; in which there is an objective world of values that are not created, though they are in some way brought to life, by our thought; in which these cosmic values are what give meaning to life.
These are not contemptible ideas, and Nozick does not merely assert them. He puts them to some explanatory work—though that work is rather narrowly conceived—and he argues about them in some detail. But what gives the ideas their initial impetus does not lie in any explanatory power—at least any beyond their effortless ability to match the conviction we may have, some of us more than others, that we have the dignity of undetermined free will and that there are objective values. What launches them is the feeling that everything would be higher and more inspiring if things conformed to Nozick’s model, and it is that feeling, together with a certain tone (of which more later), that grounds the fear that this book is trying to do a dreadful thing: to lead philosophy back to an aspiration from which the work of this century has done so much to release it, the aspiration to be edifying.
There are some important kinds of philosophical explanation that do not figure enough in these pages. One is that Kantian type of explanation I have already mentioned, the explanation of why what seems to us to be so should seem to be so if in fact it is false. There is a good example of this lack in Nozick’s first section, on the identity of the self. Philosophers have much discussed issues of what differentiates one person from another and what it is for a particular person to continue to exist: is it continuity of body, of character, of memories, or what? An important slant to these questions is given when the perspective is the person’s own. Suppose I am invited to reflect what person in the future would, under various imaginable transformations—e.g., if my memories or character or body should be radically altered—be me. Some philosophers (including myself) have claimed that the following principle applies to such cases: that the question whether a certain person in the future, let us call him Y, is the same as a person present now, X, cannot be a question of whether Y is merely the best candidate available at the time for being X.
Imagine two different states of affairs five years from now. In one of them, a certain living body, Y (not your present one), has been programmed to have your present memories and character (more or less), and your own present body has been destroyed. In the other state of affairs, Y exists, just the same, but your present body, X, also continues, with the same memories and character. Clearly in the second case, X is you, and Y is not. Y is just a copy. Does that mean that Y cannot be you in the first case either? I and others have argued that it does mean that. Nozick denies this, and claims that who one will be in the future depends on the available candidates. In the first case, you will be Y, since there is no better candidate; in the second case, you will not be Y, since there is a better candidate. He calls this the “closest continuer” theory of (personal) identity.
Nozick actually claims to show that the principle that he rejects is false, by producing a counterexample. This strays a bit, early in the book, from the protocol of eschewing proof, but in the event he does not stray far, since the counterexample is feeble and proves nothing. (It concerns a group of émigré philosophers who will be the Vienna Circle if there is no other and larger group of émigré philosophers elsewhere, but will not be if there is. But a group of persons is not the same sort of thing as a person. “Are you the Vienna Circle?” the welcoming committee asks. “At least some of it,” the émigrés might reasonably reply.)
More interestingly, Nozick proceeds to find other kinds of philosophical issues which, he claims, have a similar structure, for example, the analysis of justice, or the meaning of sentences. This is worthwhile, and sheds light on a number of questions. But even if this is so, it will not answer the question that many will feel most needs answering: how can this be the right answer for personal identity? How can it be that the question whether I should fear for what happens to some future person (supposing that I care about myself) should depend on whether someone else has been killed off who would have had a better claim to being me if he had survived? Perhaps the question can be answered, but it is not answered here, and it certainly needs to be. If what Nozick claims is true, then some things that we very deeply believe about personal identity are false. We believe, for example, that our claims to personal identity do not depend on who else is around. And what needs philosophical explanation is why we believe them. That explanation would also help us to think straight about our future without believing those things.
One of Nozick’s objectives is to respect and make sense of deep metaphysical and, in some cases, religious motivations that express themselves not only in some unschooled reflection but also in a variety of religious and philosophical traditions (he refers quite often to Indian thought). His way of confronting these traditional questionings, however, is often somewhat oblique. He takes up the question “Why is there something rather than nothing at all?” This has certainly in many traditions been felt to be a real and puzzling question: to such an extent that well-known attempts in philosophy to show that the question is misconceived tend to seem shallow and unconvincing. Nozick turns the issue into a subtle discussion of the theory of explanation. If it is claimed that a principle is explanatory of everything, can it also explain itself?
This is, once more, an interesting discussion, but the reader may feel that he or she has been left alone to work out the relevance of Nozick’s immense ingenuity and logical inventiveness to the archetypal metaphysical concern which started the discussion off. (The reader, incidentally, will need not only close attention, but also some technical knowledge, to follow Nozick down some of his paths in this book—what a Gödel numbering is, for example.)
By far the most successful section of the book is that on knowledge. This is very vigorous and resourceful, wonderfully clever, and, at a rather technical level, highly instructive. It is also academically the most conventional part of the book and very directly rooted in the recent literature. The argument is at the same time very original in its application. The basic idea is that someone knows something if he “tracks” the truth, where this means, very roughly, (1) that he believes something true, (2) that he wouldn’t believe it if it were not true, and (3) that if it were true, he would believe it—where the last clause adds the idea that not only is it true and he believes it, but his belief is “sensitive” to the truth. By “sensitive,” Nozick refers not to a special capacity of the believer but to the existence of a factual link between a belief and that which the belief is about. This is all worked out in considerable detail and with a subtlety that does not, as often happens in discussions of this subject, lose touch with the point of our having such a concept of knowledge.
The most spectacular result is achieved when this definition is applied to dealings with the skeptic. Nozick writes, “We do not seek to convince the skeptic but rather to formulate hypotheses about knowledge and our connection to facts that show how knowledge can exist even given the skeptic’s possibilities.” The skeptic says, for instance, that we do not know that we’re not in a tank having our brains stimulated by a mad scientist in such a way that it seems to us just as though we were in a room, seeing a table, and so on. So we don’t know that we are in fact seeing a table, even though it seems to be there, in perfect view, and everything seems as it usually does. Nozick says, and derives it from his definition, that we don’t know that we’re not in the tank; we do know that if we’re in the tank, then we are not seeing the table; yet we do know that we’re seeing the table. (Knowledge, in the technical phrase, is “not transitive under known logical implication.”)
This is the one argument that practically no one has used against the skeptic, and it testifies to Nozick’s remarkable discussion that this conclusion, which might seem a desperate device, begins to look natural and plausible. If one wants to know how to deal with skeptics, or indeed what knowledge is, this discussion must be read.
I am less certain that Nozick’s dealings with the skeptic get their strength, as he suggests, from his general objective of substituting explanation for proof. His point, as I’ve said, is that he is not trying to refute the skeptic, that notoriously discouraging task. But even if he is not trying to show the skeptic that the skeptic should not believe (or rather disbelieve) everything that he does, he is trying to show us that we need not accept what the skeptic says. If the skeptic is right, however, we should accept what he says; so the skeptic can’t be right. It is not obvious that those who have attempted to refute the skeptic (notably Descartes) have wanted more than that. But this is not a simple question, and this section is not only one in which the argument comes vividly to life, but also one in which the distinction between explanation and proof may for once be doing some helpful work in its own right.
When this high point of the book ends, we are less than halfway through. All the rest belongs to a division called “Value,” in which such things are discussed as free will, punishment, moral motivation, self-improvement, “the value of valuers,” and the meaning of life.
The section on free will is at several places uncharacteristically hesitant, not just in conclusion, but in direction. This is particularly so in the passage on retributive punishment, a subject on which, it seems to me, if Nozick had applied the same trenchancy as he has done to banging more fashionable views, he might well have given up. Here he attempts another application of the idea of explanation. The aim is not to justify retributive punishment (or to give a retributive justification of punishment), but to give an account of what its underlying ideas are. Nozick starts with some distinctions between revenge and retribution, and gives an elegant account of what an act of retribution is, revealing it as a form of communicative behavior which does not merely hurt but shows someone something. He then considers the simplest view of punishment as “showing” someone—a teleological version of it, in which the aim is to produce a change in the offender by which he comes to recognize his guilt.
There are well-known problems with theories of this kind, which tend to go around in a circle. The painful element, essential to punishment, in such an instructional act seems gratuitous. If the point of hurting a man is to tell him, why not just tell him? Or, if the aim is not just to tell him, but to convince him, the rationale may well become the same as that of reformative punishment. Anyway the rationale will not apply to the unreformable—apart from the point that it will always be an open question whether he might not be more effectively convinced by other means.
So Nozick moves to a wholly nonteleological interpretation, as he hopes, of retributive punishment. The aim of retribution is not merely to produce certain consequences but to do something “right or good in itself.” The aim, as he puts it, is to “connect the offender with correct values,” where this is not an aim that is added on to the act of punishment, but inherent in it. Nozick’s idea is to produce an effect on the offender, not necessarily in him: correct values are given “some significant effect in his life.” But, once again, why painful punishment rather than something else? This, replies Nozick, is necessary for it to be a significant connection with values. Why then should only those who have actually done wrong be so connected with values? Because, Nozick would answer, the wrong they have committed shows them to be not just unlinked, but “anti-linked,” to values. Is this, however, not also true of the dispositionally wicked? But, Nozick claims, if they have not committed acts they have not flouted values, and the aim of retributive punishment is to “replace flouting with linkage.”
The effect of Nozick’s criticism of the old arguments against retribution is simply to have reduced to the smallest possible circumference the circle in which the argument moves. He is not trying to produce a justification of retribution, but he does aim to produce its rationale, and the rationale provided moves round in so tight a circle that it is hard to see how the justification of retribution might eventually be applied. The “role of suffering in punishment,” Nozick says, is “to negate or lessen flouting by making it impossible to remain as pleased with one’s previous anti-linkage.” That version, in fact, is not yet entirely purged of the teleological—for suppose he remains pleased with his previous anti-linkage? But even with that impurity, the account is so utterly wrapped in itself that it is not going to give much insight to anyone who was previously puzzled by the idea of retributive punishment.
Another feature of the discussion of punishment is shared by all the material on value: it is vastly removed from any actual social institution. There are one or two desultory references to the law, but virtually nothing that focuses on the fact that punishment is inflicted by some actual authority in some actual social circumstances. This characteristic, spread over the whole large discussion of value, issues in a level of abstraction that is often bewildering, and which utterly discounts many obligations which one might have thought to be precisely obligations of philosophical explanation.
Value, we are told (I suppose one should rather say: “it is suggested”), consists basically in the degree of “organic unity.” We value, he implies, that which unifies diverse and apparently separate materials or experiences. Not much is done to give content to this old and uninformative proposal. For Nozick, as for earlier writers, it is based on the differing complexities of higher and lower organisms and on some selected considerations about aesthetic objects—despite well-known and indeed obvious difficulties about measuring “organic unity” anywhere, and, in the case of art, when we can supposedly detect it, doubts about necessarily preferring its increase. But such problems do not seem to concern Nozick very much. He is more interested in a set of logical devices dealing with the notion of value in the abstract. He discusses in detail such topics as what would be involved in “tracking bestness,” as he puts it, and “why is being a value-seeker and responder to value qua value itself valuable?”
Very little of this offers a direction to a psychology of moral action. Nor does it stoop to recognize any of the well-known problems raised by social explanations of actual systems of moral value, for example the conflicts between different systems of value in different societies and the difficulty of achieving objectivity in describing or explaining them. Indeed Nozick barely pays much attention to any distinctively human category. The picture we are left with is of the objective cosmic dimension of value as organic unity, with our having the opportunity to link ourselves with this, and by that be transformed and elevated. These salutations to independent values, alternating as they do with very detailed formalistic arguments (on the conflict of obligations, for instance), give the impression of some beautiful nebula, at one time seen through the optical telescope, at another with its light broken down through the spectroscope. There is a difference, however, since a nebula sends light to us, but values are inactive, unless we make them active in and through us. As Nozick puts it, in a very typical passage:
Value seekers and responders have a cosmic role: to aid in the realization of value, in the infusion of value into the material and human realm.
Can that possibly, one begins to wonder, be the way to put it—to put anything?
If we do take up our cosmic role, then we may, according to Nozick, be transformed. One of the most important features of his account, and one that he seems least prone to regard as peculiar, is his emphasis on the notion of spiritual superiority, and indeed on a kind of ressentiment, a destructive and belittling envy that can be aroused by the spiritual superiority of people who, as Nozick sees them, have excelled in this cosmic role. Many of his passages that are most genuinely passionate are about this subject. They have the same note, and the same animus, as was to be found in Anarchy, State, and Utopia on the subject of envy directed toward more mundane forms of superiority. The tone of the present account introduces more than a hint of a competition in spirituality.
There is something very wrong with the way in which these notions are deployed in Nozick’s writing: that is to say, there is something wrong with the writing, and also something wrong with them. The theory itself does not give much content to these ideas of spiritual self-improvement, and the level of generality prevents his giving us any side illumination from the merely historical or psychologically particular. He tries to give us the idea directly, so to speak, and the fact is that we cannot trust him as a messenger from any spiritual height, because by the time that he is fully launched on his cosmic role he not only cannot hear anything that is happening on Earth, but cannot properly listen to himself.
It is not merely a matter of the occasional sententious banality: “It is better and lovelier to be moral”; “imagination has always been a faculty prized by students of literature and art”; “in our own biographies, at least, each of us is the leading character.” Such phrases are alarming enough—as Anthony Burgess’s narrator says in Earthly Powers, “If I could write so blatant a tautology, I could write also of the goodness of evil or the badness of good, and probably, somewhere or other, did.” But it is more generally true that the nearer we get to Nozick’s image of what he calls “spiritually advanced persons”—the arousers of ressentiment in those unwilling to be, as he puts it, “helped along” in this direction—the more his capacity to listen to himself seems to lapse:
There are some individuals whose lives are infused by values, who pursue values with single-minded purity and intensity, who embody values to the greatest extent. These individuals glow with a special radiance. Epochal religious figures often have this quality. To be in their presence (or even to hear about them) is to be uplifted and drawn (at least temporarily) to pursue the best in oneself. There are less epochal figures as well, glowing with a special moral and value loveliness, whose presence uplifts us, whose example lures and inspires us.
There is a lot more of this. There is even more about people glowing. Such writing sounds like Close Encounters of Some Yet Higher Kind, or a commercial for breakfast food. Whether its defects derive from the state of the modern world or from the English language now or (as I believe) from confusion about values, it will not do. And Nozick, even if he has switched off the monitor to Earth, will know, since he is a very good philosopher, that the problem cannot just be a matter of finding some happier way of saying the same thing.
In fact I think that the part of this book that is about value is utterly misconceived, and that the whole enterprise of approaching the problems in this abstract way, virtually unrelated to human psychology or society, and assuming ill-defined and suspect notions of spiritual superiority, is a large error. I do not believe that there is any cosmic role, and I think that Nietzsche was right when he said that philosophy should stick close to the Earth. But even if I am wrong, and there is something to be recovered from such conceptions, it is a basic truth, which Nozick seems not to have encountered at all, that it could not be recovered in these terms, or by such ingenuous methods. It is not a new truth. The wise men to whom Nozick sometimes refers, rabbis, gurus, Zen masters, have known and shown that the cosmic role, if there is one, needs a high measure of irony, personal and indeed cosmic, in order to be presented or interpreted. A craftier route to the beyond will always be needed, if there is a beyond, and the mere combination of cleverness with earnestness is not going to find it.
Note
1. Philosophical Explanations, by Robert Nozick (Belknap Press of Harvard University Press, 1981).
