The Nature of Opera
Entry for The New Grove Dictionary of Opera
Definitions and borderlines
Opera is by definition staged sung drama, but that leaves many questions unresolved, some simply verbal, but others interesting for the nature of the form.‘Staged’ represents a significant requirement. Operas can of course be given concert performances, and these are sometimes ‘semi-staged’, under conventions that allow some token costume, décor and movement. But works not intended at all for costumed theatrical presentation do not count.
Sunk in financial disaster from his efforts with Italian opera in London, Handel turned to the oratorio, and the resulting works are not seen as a form of opera, simply because they were not designed for a theatrical style of presentation (though they do contain a number of what might be called stage directions). However, this example itself shows that, from a musical or stylistic point of view, less may turn on these classifications than one might assume. It has often been remarked that Handel’s English oratorios can be intensely dramatic in their effect – sometimes more so than the examples of opera seria to which he had devoted his efforts in the theatre.
The main stylistic point that underlies the distinction between opera and oratorio tends to be the role of the chorus, which in oratorio is a constant presence and a major structural feature. But there are operas that deliberately reach for this effect (a recent example is Goehr’s Behold the Sun [ Die Wiedertäufer]), and there are other works that are sometimes presented in theatrical form and sometimes not, the most famous perhaps being Stravinsky’s Oedipus rex, which, having been first performed, in 1927, as an oratorio and in the following year produced as an opera, has subsequently moved in and out of the theatre. In this particular case, the ambiguity marked by this history is central to the work, which by a variety of devices, including a Latin text, aims at a monumental neo-classical effect.
The requirement that opera be sung is unbreakable, though there are styles that question the distinction between speech and song, in particular the device of Sprechgesang developed by Schoenberg and his pupils. A more wide-ranging question concerns the amount or proportion of song that an opera should contain. Recitativo secco is unequivocally a form of song; controversy about its use, as contrasted with opera that is durchkom-poniert (through-composed), has played an important part in the history of changing conceptions of opera, but the conventions of recitative do not call in question the identity of opera as song. The role of spoken dialogue, on the other hand, raises issues of genre that connect in curiously complex ways with matters of nationality, content, audience and performance style.
No-one denies that the German tradition of Singspiel has produced not only operas, but at least two of the greatest operas there are, The Magic Flute and Fidelio. A descendant of this tradition, also German-speaking but more associated with Vienna, is segregated under the separate name of ‘operetta’, presumably a diminutive of contempt for works that have a stereotypically frivolous plot and are often musically very thin. However, pieces in this style have regularly been performed by some leading opera singers, and there are at least two outstanding examples, Die Fledermaus and The Merry Widow, that have established themselves in the international repertoire of opera houses. In Vienna itself, there were two different houses, and the convention was that operetta did not appear at the Staatsoper; in Paris there were similar distinctions, between the Opéra at the Palais Garnier, the Opéra-Comique at the Salle Favart, and the Bouffes-Parisien, though the relation between the content of a given piece and the house in which it was produced was not altogether straightforward. In the French tradition, it was not the presence of spoken dialogue that made the difference between opera and operetta, any more than it did in the German case: what is perhaps the greatest of French operas, Carmen, has spoken dialogue in its original version. It seems a question rather of musical ambition and dramatic content. Not much French operetta has made its way into the international repertoire; the one work of Offenbach’s to hold a steady place there is The Tales of Hoffmann, and that was called by him an opera (and produced at the Opéra-Comique).
With works originally written in English, the situation is different. For various reasons, virtually no work with English spoken dialogue is regu- larly produced in an opera house. The stage works with dialogue for which Purcell wrote music, such as King Arthur, are classed as plays, which moreover are dramatically unrewarding and demand discouragingly elaborate staging. In the eighteenth century, many ballad operas with dialogue appeared, and the most famous of them, The Beggar’s Opera, is occasionally revived, but that effectively had no composer (the ballads were arranged by Pepusch), and indeed exists only as melodic line and bass. The works of Gilbert and Sullivan, the English parallel to Offenbach, have borne a peculiar relation to the operatic tradition, in part because of the historical accident that for decades a monopoly was exercised over them by the D’Oyly Carte Company, who imposed not only a stereotyped manner of production but also, and more significantly, a particular style of singing. Many of the performers were G & S specialists, who did not appear in the operatic repertoire. Now that the copyright has lapsed, some of the pieces have been successfully staged by an operatic company.
The most significant fact, however, about the English-speaking tradition is not the absence of partly spoken works which might be operas, but the immense success of a type of work with dialogue which is quite clearly not an opera, the musical. In English-speaking countries, it is the musical that has played the role in popular taste which, earlier, was played in Vienna by operetta and in Italy by Italian opera itself. To deny that the musical is opera is not simply a stipulation. It originated from operetta, in particular from the emigration of German composers to the United States, but it has developed in such a way that, at least as things now stand, the styles of dramatic performance and singing appropriate to it are different from those needed for most kinds of opera. The point has been sharply illustrated by opera companies’ occasional attempts to perform musicals ( Kiss Me Kate is an example), which are almost always unsuccessful, and also by the unsatisfactory casting of operatic artists in a recording of Bernstein’s West Side Story, a work which tries to stand on the boundary between the two traditions.
In the 1980s there were signs of some convergence between a broad-ening taste for opera (associated with the immense success in various media of certain singers, notably Luciano Pavarotti) and popular musical theatre. However, this has not yet been translated into any worthwhile new forms. Several shows have tried to combine the form and appeal of the musical, compositional tricks taken from Puccini, and theatrical effects on a Meyerbeerian scale, and financially have been very successful, but in terms of anything except spectacle they fall below their sources.
The relations between opera and the other forms which are contrasted with it are thus complex, and the distinctions (in particular, that between opera and operetta) are to some degree arbitrary. The present position is that ‘opera’ is to some extent an evaluative term, used to refer to sung drama which is either ‘serious’ enough, or traditional enough in form and technique, to be staged in an opera house. (These criteria can of course themselves diverge: some bel canto works which are canonical examples of opera have virtually no serious dramatic content.) Moreover, history has had different effects on various national traditions. After Wagner’s achievement, and the failure of his unnecessary attempt to distinguish his works from opera by calling them ‘music dramas’, it has come about that new operas almost inevitably have pretensions to being serious and often difficult works of art. The Italian tradition was most resistant to this modernist development, but its capacity to produce highly popular new works in what was indisputably an operatic tradition did not survive the death of Puccini. (It is tempting to speculate that the reasons why he was unable to write the love duet at the end of Turandot, his last work, were not just depth-psychological, as Mosco Carner well argued, but cultural: the Princess of Death, with her orchestral complexities, had claimed the popular tradition as well as her previous suitors.) The entrenched division between opera as art work and other kinds of musical theatre, such as the musical, is presently expressed in differences of vocal and performance style. However, this in itself should not be insu-perable: what is by general agreement opera already accommodates a wide variety of vocal styles. The problem is cultural rather than merely stylistic.
The fear is often expressed that opera has become a museum category, under which a restricted (and in fact quite small) repertoire of works by dead composers is supplemented only by a few difficult new works, of which virtually none survive their first production. This last point in itself is nothing new. At various times in which opera has flourished, such as in the nineteenth-century heyday of Italian opera, hundreds of works have been staged and never revived. The difference is that, as is generally the case with popular forms in which most works are expected to be dispos-able, the investment of resources was relatively low compared with what is now involved in staging a new opera. Above all, the composer’s investment of effort in any one work was less. The Wagnerian model of the heroic composer creating a unique and challenging masterpiece will work only on the rare occasions that this is indeed what is created, and it cannot sustain a practice or tradition. A few twentieth-century composers have tried to deal with this problem, but their experiments have not had continuing results. Weill, in his collaboration with Brecht, worked in music theatre outside the opera house. Benjamin Britten, who was comparatively prolific among twentieth-century opera composers, deliberately aimed in some of his works at an effect simpler than that of his first (and still most successful) opera, the very traditional Peter Grimes, and in the ‘church parables’ looked to a staging that would avoid the theatre.
The fact that the operatic repertoire is small, old and not expanding does not mean that this repertoire itself has only a small or ‘élitist’ audience; that complaint is also made, but it is to an increasing extent untrue.
The opera house may be a museum, but museums are themselves popular.
The problem is not so much that the tradition of opera is cut off from popular appreciation, as that new pieces of musical theatre which are unselfconsciously enjoyed by many people are cut off from the tradition of opera, and so from what makes opera uniquely interesting, the achievement of intense dramatic expression by essentially musical means.
Cultural critics such as Adorno saw this development as an historical inevitability, but despair over the future of interesting musical theatre is uncalled for. There will perhaps be new works that will cut through current anxieties and make these definitional complexities out of date.
What they will be cannot of course be foreseen, except by someone who will write one.
Words, music, drama
The relations of speech and song are a problem only for some operas, but all opera has to find an accommodation between words and music.
Dr Burney wrote in the 1780s,
As the British government consists of three estates: King, Lords, and Commons, so an opera in its first institution consisted of Poetry, Music and Machinery: but as politicians have observed, that the balance of power is frequently disturbed by some one of the three estates encroaching upon the other two, so one of these three constituent parts of a musical drama generally preponderates, at the expence of the other two. In the first operas POETRY seems to have been the most important personage; but about the middle of the last century MACHINERY and DECORATION seemed to take the lead . . . But as the art of singing and dramatic composition improved, MUSIC took the lead.
Burney’s words are carefully chosen to avoid the false idea that the balance of power between music and words is the same thing as a balance between music and drama. It is a fallacy to argue that since, in a musical drama, the music obviously provides the music, so the words must provide the drama.
As anyone knows who has ever enjoyed an opera, music and words both provide the drama. In the terms of Burney’s political analogy, the drama is the government itself, rather than one of the estates. Yet it has proved easy to forget this, particularly on the various occasions when it has been thought that through some imbalance opera had become undramatic and stood in need of reform.
Dr Johnson’s celebrated description of opera as ‘an exotic and irrational entertainment’ was directed to the Italian opera of his time, above all to opera seria with its lengthy da capo arias, which imposed an elaborate musical structure, were not intended to secure any dramatic development in the course of the song itself, and greatly emphasised musical decorations which gave singers an opportunity for technical display. As well as implying certain musical and dramatic forms, opera seria also involved a set of rigid theatrical conventions, under which, for instance, a singer expected to exit at the end of his or her aria.
Opera seria was so effectively ridiculed (notably in The Beggar’s Opera, the success of which induced Handel to move towards freer forms), so eloquently criticised, and so creatively replaced, that it has stood for almost two centuries as a paradigm of ways in which an operatic style may fail to realise the potentialities of sung drama. The lack of performances mirrors the reputation: leaving aside the special case of La clemenza di Tito (which in any case departs from the conventions), no opera seria holds the stage, even though Handel’s, in particular, contain much outstanding music.* The seeming finality of this historical judgment on opera seria has perhaps discouraged discussion of what exactly was wrong with it. The standard criticism is that it is ‘static’ or ‘undramatic’, but such terms do no more than register what needs to be explained. Opera seria did not, as the criticisms may imply, simply ignore the relations of music and words to *This essay was published before the more recent experiments in the staging of Handel, but see pp. 76, 123–5 and 130 for later references to Theodora.
drama; it approached them, rather, in a special way, and if, having taken that way, it seems now to lie in irreversible coma, it is instructive to ask why that should be.
Dr Burney (in a different work) used his preferred terms of the division of labour to describe the war between the tradition of opera seria and Gluck’s ‘reform’ operas:
Party runs as high among poets, musicians and their adherents, at Vienna as elsewhere. Metastasio and Hasse may be said to be at the head of one of the principal sects; and Calsabigi and Gluck of another. The first, regarding all innovations as quackery, adhere to the ancient form of the musical drama, in which the poet and the musician claim equal attention from the audience; the bard in the recitatives and the narrative parts; and the composer in the airs, duos, and chorusses. The second party depend more on theatrical effects, propriety of character, simplicity of diction, and of musical execution, than on, what they style, flowery descriptions, superfluous similes, sententious and cold morality, on one side, with tiresome symphonies, and long divisions, on the other.
Calzabigi, who as librettist and propagandist was a prime mover of the reform associated with Orfeo and other later works of Gluck, himself wrote of the new style,
All is nature here, all is passion; there are no sententious reflections, no philosophy or politics, no paragons of virtue . . . [The plot is] reduced to the dimensions of Greek tragedy, and therefore has the unique advantage of exciting terror and compassion in the same way as spoken tragedy . . . The music has no other function than to express what arises from the words, which are therefore neither smothered by notes nor used to lengthen the spectacle unduly, because it is ridiculous to prolong the sentence ‘I love you’ (for instance) with a hundred notes when nature has restricted it to three.
Each of these texts may give the impression that the reform party’s aim was to redress the balance in favour of words as against music; and since the reform party not only won their war against opera seria, but are likely to be understood now as urging in their own time a message about musical drama that is rather the same as Wagner’s or Verdi’s in the next century, we may well ourselves see the reform in those same terms. But it is not an adequate account of what the reformers themselves wanted, and even less so of what modern taste may find lacking in o pera seria. The da capo aria was not emotionally inexpressive, and the emotions it expressed (at its best, very effectively) were relevant to the action. Moreover, it cannot be an objection to those arias or to the other conventions of this style that the music is not evenly directed to the onward movement of the action. That is true in some way of almost all operas, and in an opera with self-contained arias it is standard that they should not move the action forward in time, but deepen it psychologically.
The peculiarity of the da capo arias lay, rather, in the fact that, by a well-established rhetorical decorum, each aria was allowed to express only one emotion. In addition, the words, having established what the emotion was, could be used decoratively for musical, or at least vocal, purposes, with the repetitions and the elongations of syllables about which Calzabigi complained. To a later taste, the very idea of identifying and labelling the emotions in the way that this tradition required is likely to seem schematic and unsatisfactory. Later Italian opera, particularly in the hands of Verdi, can of course wonderfully express very simple emotions, but then the means of expression themselves are, or seem, very direct. In opera seria, what are labelled as very simple feelings receive an elaborate musical expression; the complexity of the musical means is not matched by any complication of feeling or psychological development. The power of the music, though it can be considerable, is, so to speak, earthed by the simplicity of the dramatic content and the determined labelling effected by the text.
The difficulties with opera seria cannot be captured in terms of the relative importance of words and music; nor by the charge – which is in good part untrue – that the form was emotionally inexpressive. The reformers themselves spoke in praise of the simple and the natural as contrasted with the complex and artificial. In part, this merely represented the Rousseauesque fashion of the time, and certainly the lesson could not be drawn that the way for opera to succeed where opera seria had failed was just by being simpler – the technical innocence of Gluck was not in itself the sign-post pointing towards Mozart. The basic point was rather that the elaboration of means in opera seria was not well related to its emotional and dramatic content. The music was too complex for the content, but equally the content was too simple for the music. Above all, the style did not adequately acknowledge the power of music to express feeling that cannot be fully captured in words, a power which underlies the special opportunities that opera possesses as a form of drama. Those possibilities are not, of course, a more recent discovery, but are exploited by some of the earliest operas, notably by Monteverdi.
Some of the limitations of opera seria were implicit in its forms, but it was also true that it suffered from having ceded (not for the last time in the history of opera) too much control to the performers, whose demands could impede both the composer and the librettist. Wagner shrewdly said that Gluck’s reforms did not really advance the dramatist in relation to the composer, but the composer in relation to the singers, a remark which itself implies that if the older form was undramatic, it was not because the music was emphasised at the expense of the words. The innovations that Wagner himself preached in his writings claimed to reassert a balance between the elements of opera, but some of the terms that he used do not express very satisfactorily what was most radical in his practice (or, rather, his constantly developing practice) in the works from Das Rheingold on.
He sometimes expressed his aspirations in terms of the Gesamtkunstwerk, a drama that would bind into a total unity music, words, acting and stage spectacle. As critics have pointed out, this conception in itself determines very little. Every opera puts these elements together in one way or another, and indeed a kind of opera that Wagner peculiarly despised, the French grand opera of Scribe and Meyerbeer (of which he memorably said that it consisted of effects without causes), could claim in one sense to offer a more ‘total’ work of art than his, since it standardly included ballet, which his typically did not. The theory of the Gesamtkunstwerk did not in itself fully reveal how the relations of words, music and the visual were to be adapted to what Wagner really wanted, which was a new conception not just of opera but of drama.
Wagner regarded French opera as bombastically empty, distinguished neither for its words nor for its music. Rossini, the master of Italian opera, he saw as a counter-revolutionary, comparing him to a reactionary statesman: ‘As Metternich, with perfect logic on his side, could not conceive the state under any form but that of absolute monarchy, so Rossini, with no less force of argument, could conceive the opera under no other form than that of absolute melody.’ In this context, and granted also that he thought that the genius of Mozart had been poured into inadequate texts (and, in the case of Così fan tutte, a deplorable subject), Wagner particularly emphasised the importance of the words – which, for all his operas, were of course his own words. In developing his later style, he at first tended to assert the primacy of words, and Das Rheingold, in particular, is to some extent an expression of this ideal. However, as the music of the Ring developed, and in the light of his experience with Tristan and Die Meistersinger he gave up this emphasis. The words were always of course important; he invested them with a complex philosophical content, removed almost all repetitions, and did his best to make the text heard over the music, placing the orchestra in the Festspielhaus at Bayreuth under the stage (though he chose this arrangement also because he wanted there to be an uninterrupted view of the stage picture). But while the force of the words was essential, he moved to a view that if anything was primary, it was the music: in a later essay, he described his dramas as ‘deeds of music made manifest’. The sheer cumulative progression of the work almost inevitably meant that the music should become more complex as the drama went on, and in addition to that, the technical developments in his style during the period in which he broke off from the cycle produced an alteration in the music, in particular a symphonic flexibility in the use of the motives, which is very evident at the beginning of the third act of Siegfried, the point at which he took it up again.
Time, expression and the inner world
Perhaps the single most powerful resource of opera as a dramatic form is its capacity to use musical means not only to advance the action in time, but to deepen it. It implies a complex relation between real and dramatic time; while time passes in the theatre, a sequence is unfolded by the orchestra and singers which does not represent a sequence at all, or at least not a sequence of events, but some other dimension of the action, often a state of mind, a mood or a motivation. The arias in opera seria, it has already been suggested, were a device for exploring the emotional implications of the action, but it was not entirely successful, partly because of a restrictive rhetoric of the emotions, partly because the parts in which the action was advanced were schematic and compressed and often without musical interest.
In Mozart and Da Ponte’s comedies, the resource is developed in many different and very subtle ways. It is used to distinguish the characters from one another; moreover, it is deployed differently in the various operas, and this contributes significantly to their distinctive atmospheres. In The Marriage of Figaro, each principal character has at least one self-revelatory aria, and these differ not only in what they say and in their musical character, but in their occasion. Both Figaro and the Count burst into declaration of their feelings in the face of immediate events, but the Countess needs no special occasion, and when we first see her, she is overflowing with nostalgia and regret. In Don Giovanni it is important that, while other characters sing about themselves, Giovanni never does. He is all action, and the lack of any piece that reveals anything more about him leaves us with a very appropriate sense that there is nothing to be revealed; his significance lies in such things as the vitality that he, in his music, communicates to everyone else. Così fan tutte uses to contrasting effect declarations made by the same characters at different stages of the action.
It creates the remarkable impression that the elaborate conventional arias in the first act are public performances, occurring in real time, while the expressions of feeling later in the work, particularly from Fiordiligi, come from an inner world; just for this reason, when the tenor interrupts her most affecting piece, ‘Fra gli amplessi’, the sense is given that he has broken not just into her song but into her life.
In Wagner’s work, the resources of psychological exploration became the essence of musical drama. This was not altogether his intention. He wanted his works to constitute a new kind of myth, a modern analogue to Aeschylean tragedy. To some extent, he succeeded, but it was perhaps inevitable that in the nineteenth century these aims should be shaped by explorations of the subjective individual consciousness. Particularly in the Ring, mythic, symbolic and political themes are arranged in a structure of personal motivation which in itself could well figure in a more naturalistic style of drama. The means that Wagner invented to make this possible are to be found in a text and a musical texture that make it very easy to move between the inner and the outer world: exchanges between characters, first-personal declarations made by one character to another, and music or words which express a welling up of the characters’ conscious or unconscious thoughts merge into one another in a fluent and natural way. At the same time, the flow of these materials is controlled by a powerful sense of theatrical pace. Critics of Wagner’s works (who include some who hate them, with an intensity probably unique in operatic taste) are disposed to say that they are too long, but this is the consequence of dislike, not its ground: since the works are long, those who hate them naturally find them too long. Some passages can be recognised even by enthusiasts as unnecessary (though it is not easy to get agreement on which they are), but none of the mature works is seriously too long for what it is trying to do, and in all of them, well performed, there is a steady pulse against which the developments of both the inner and the outer life unfold in a timely and coherent way.
The contrasts in almost all respects between Wagner and Verdi are so sharp that in general there is not much to be learned from them about the aesthetics of opera. The fact that two musical geniuses, born in the same year, should produce works so totally different in their aims and methods is, certainly, revealing about two national cultures. Verdi took up a popular tradition of opera, and insisted that he remained within it, as he developed works of increasing complexity and technical sophistication. It is entirely fitting that at his funeral the large crowd should have spontaneously started to sing ‘Va pensiero’, the famous patriotic chorus from Nabucco, his first masterpiece, written nearly sixty years before. Verdi was a national hero, and he was popular in the straightforward sense that his tunes could be taken up by the town band, the café trio or the barrel organ. The contrast with Wagner’s artistic relations to nationalism, and with his conception of ‘a people’, could not be more striking. Wagner wanted to give the German people a German art. This implied both that they did not yet have such a thing, and that a creative individual was needed to bring it into being. Moreover, this creative act was to occur at the frontiers of expressive innovation. The work that more than any other Wagner acknowledged as his inspiration was Beethoven’s Ninth Symphony, and his ambitions were defined in terms of the selfconsciously progressive art work. Verdi merely ignored any such ideas for most of his career, and treated them with great suspicion when in his later years they were pressed on him by Boito.
Granted these vast differences, comparisons between the two composers are often uninteresting. In the handling of dramatic time, however, the diametrical differences between them are instructive. Verdi was always concerned to achieve pace, constantly urging his librettists to cut and condense, and his works are marked by a powerful forward movement, very characteristic of him and not simply of the Italian tradition (there is a marked contrast with Bellini). The pace is that of external events; his characters are almost always doing something, and their psychology is expressed typically in action rather than in reflection. Some of his operas, above all Rigoletto, achieve a perfect dramatic pace in these terms: rapid developments are rapidly unfolded, with no sense of theatrical strain. He had other ways, as well, of handling dramatic pace. Two of his finest works offer a very satisfactory sense of elapsed time, but in interestingly different terms: Don Carlos is slower and more reflective, and leaves a greater space for the exploration of motive, while Falstaff sustains a very fast pace adjusted to comic developments, and does it by using a radically original and fluent musical idiom.
There are other Verdi operas, however, in which the effect of his brisk dealings with time is more questionable, and they include some which in other respects are among his finest. Just because the inner life of his characters is given very largely through the events presented, there is a danger that as the presentation of the events speeds up, so, seemingly, does their inner life: we may be left with no sense of a space beside or among the happenings in which we can locate their thoughts or feelings. There is a problem of this kind in the second act of La traviatar, where the narration is so briskly compressed that the hero and the heroine both seem to be acting in a state of frantic haste. There is not much to encourage the thought that this effect is intended, and the impression can be distinctly like that of watching an old film.
A similar difficulty, at a deeper level, affects Otello. Boito is often complimented for having eliminated the first act of Shakespeare’s play, but that act in fact lays the basis of the relations between the main characters, and its removal, together with the compression of time in which Othello’s feelings change, moves his character sharply towards the pathological. In addition, within the tight boundaries set by the compression, Boito could find no room for the already difficult matter of Iago’s motivation, and tried to condense it into one self-revelatory monologue, the famous ‘Credo’, which produced a magnificent aria but also contributed to making the situation less humanly credible. In the case of Otello, considerations of speed, more than anything else, serve to turn a tragedy into a melodrama.
The extraordinary success of Wagner’s manipulation of the relations between outer action and inner feeling had its own cost. Because every aspect of the characters’ experience is expressed and nourished by the unified flow of musical material, which in each work has its own distinctive quality, there is a danger that the characters will seem to merge – at the limit, that the whole may seem to belong to one experience. If this goes too far, the spectator’s experience of the drama may take on the quality of being inside the composer’s head: it is related to the feeling of being consumed or absorbed which is a well-known reaction to Wagner’s work, and which is notoriously feared and resented by many who experience it.
It is a kind of reaction inconceivable in the case of Mozart or of Verdi, where there is no tendency for the power and individuality of the style to threaten the seeming autonomy of the characters.
Debussy had this kind of difficulty in mind in setting out to write a post-Wagnerian opera. It was not merely what he called the ‘American opulence’ of Wagner’s textures that he wanted to escape. Harmonically Pelléas et Mélisande owes a good deal to the experiments of Parsifal, but it conceives the relations of music and drama in terms very different from Wagner’s. ‘I do not feel tempted to imitate what I admire in Wagner,’ Debussy wrote;‘my conception of dramatic art is different. According to mine, music begins where speech fails. Music is intended to convey the inexpressible . . . I would have her always discreet.’ This in itself might seem to fit a traditional view of Pelléas, that it achieves its great refinement at the cost of an enervated passivity, an image of it which is encouraged if one is too impressed by Debussy’s admiration for Poe and his recurrent interest in The Fall of the House of Usher. But Debussy also said that what he wanted for libretti were ‘poems that will provide me with changing scenes, varied as regards place and atmosphere, in which the characters will not argue, but live their lives and work out their destinies’. Joseph Kerman has described Pelléas as a ‘sung play’, and this arrives at the same point, from the opposite direction, as Mallarmé’s remark about Maeterlinck’s drama when it first appeared, that it was an opera without music. The music does not cancel the work’s character as a drama, or impose passivity on it. What it emphasises, rather, is the imperfection of action, and human beings’ indeterminate understanding of what they are doing. ‘Nous ne voyons jamais que l’envers des destinées,’ the aged Arkel remarks,‘l’envers même de la nôtre’: the back, or reverse side, of our lives. We do see something, but it is the wrong way round and fragmentary, gaining a sense only from another point of view.
Debussy presents this compelling picture of the mental world in a way uniquely successful in opera. He laid aside every convention by which opera had traditionally been assumed to express the inner life of its characters explicitly, totally, and on the authority of the composer.
Pelléas is particularly difficult to produce; it is hard to embody its basic sense of the indeterminacy of human relations, and of there simply being no truth of the kind that the jealous Golaud seeks. Pressed in one direction, it dissolves into a faintly Symbolist vagueness, while in the other it offers a rather nasty but underdescribed domestic disaster. But its difficulties also measure its achievement, as being one of the few operas to have engaged with the typically twentieth-century idea that reality is not merely given, but both demands interpretation and can defeat it. Some works of Richard Strauss flirt with such ideas – Ariadne auf Naxos perhaps, or Capriccio – but none is committed to developing them. Stravinsky, in The Rake’s Progress, characteristically changed the subject, and selfconsciously addressed the technical problems of a less selfconscious operatic tradition.
The one composer besides Debussy whose operas successfully took up typically modern problems of psychological opacity and the dramatist’s narrative authority was Berg. He is a descendant of Wagner not just in technical terms of the history of atonality, but as one who created a new kind of musical drama from demandingly avant-garde materials. He resembles Wagner, too, in an insistent (in his case, obsessional) compositorial presence, but he avoided the problem that Wagner had left, of reconciling that presence with the characters’ autonomy, by cultivating a dramatic effect in which any appearance of that autonomy has disappeared. His characters lack effective action, or an inner life, or both. The protagonists of the two operas are victims, and almost every other character (with the exceptions of Marie in Wozzeck and Geschwitz in Lulu) is a grotesque and empty construct of behaviour. The conventional name of this style, ‘Expressionism’, may well have been applied to it by an imperfect analogy with painting, but it has its logic in the history of music. An operatic technique which restricts characters to depersonalised aspects of a compelling and disturbing musical development is directly descended, through Schoenberg’s experiments, from Wagner’s design of expressing the rich inner life of his characters by making it immediately accessible to their musical environment. This design contains the possibility, which is already present in Tristan and is most obvious in Amfortas’s music in Parsifal, that the expression will itself become the environment. The distinctions dissolve between the characters’ inner life and the whole world of the opera, and that part of Wagner’s project which consisted in finding new musical means to represent individual psychological character (in itself, a traditional aim) falls away.
Performance and repetition
There are a few plays that are constantly revived, and they are almost all masterpieces, frequently performed because they are thought to reward repeated reinterpretation. There are many pieces of music of which the same is true, but there are more which do not make the same claim to inexhaustible depth, yet are frequently performed because people wish simply to hear them, or to hear a particular artist perform them. In this respect, musical drama is music rather than drama. Some of the works in the repertoire do fall into the class of inexhaustible masterpieces, but more do not, and they are repeatedly performed because of an interest in performance rather than in dramatic reinterpretation.
The interest in performance is in the first place an interest in singers, and there are some people whose concern with opera is primarily directed to the talents and achievements of singers. As well as discriminating connoisseurs, there are devoted and enthusiastic fans who attach themselves to leading artists. Their popularity can give these artists great power in the opera house, and the demands, tantrums and absurdities of some performers in the past are legendary. This is less to be found now, and there are probably no singers left who insist, as some used to do, on wearing their own costume in a given role whatever the production might be. Gluck, Verdi and others opposed such excesses in their time, and in the last fifty years, particularly under Wagnerian influence, the dramatic demands of opera have to a great extent prevailed against the tastes and habits of more traditional performers and their supporters. The development has brought about a great improvement in operatic acting, and it has also yielded many radically new and interesting productions.
It is true that the idiosyncrasies of singers have to some extent been replaced by those of directors, and most seasoned opera-goers have seen in recent decades some production of a well-known work in which only the music revealed what opera it was. This is not only a matter of a fashion-able trend; it also involves a shift in what is meant by the repetition of operas. When the emphasis moves to dramatic realisation, a new staging of an opera cannot count as simply a new series of performances, but is an invitation to a reinterpretation. However, since many operas that are worth performing offer few rewards to dramatic rediscovery, attempts to find new significance in their drama can be very strained. In an extreme case, the enterprise may be thought to be based on a misunderstanding, a confusion between an exploration of a work and, simply, a performance of it. But there is no easy road back from this point. A merely conventional production may well be disappointing unless the performance is very good indeed, and the growing popularity of opera, which means more performances, joins, rather paradoxically, with increasing dramatic demands on the works performed, with the effect that the already small repertoire becomes even more restricted. The next demand on directors’ ingenuity may be to invent ways in which dramatically less interesting operas can be merely performed.
The historical conflicts between the dramatic and the performance aspects of opera have been concerned with the power of singers. They do not call in question the power of singing, which is at the heart of all opera.
The enjoyment of opera, particularly of Italian opera, immediately involves the enjoyment of a technique. At a fine operatic performance, the audience is conscious of the singers’ achievement and the presence of physical style and vitality; a feeling of performance and of the performers’ artistry is more constantly at the front of the mind than it is with other dramatic arts. It is because of this that outbreaks of applause may be appropriate, though the granting of encores is a lot less common than it once was. These practices may sometimes get in the way of the drama, but the sense of performance in itself does not; it is allied with musical intensity in reinforcing the drama.
There are interesting comparisons in these respects with ballet, where the sense of performance and technique is paramount, but which (in Western culture at least) is less committed to being a dramatic art, and has closer relations with both the decorative and the athletic. At the same time, the demands on opera singers, even more than on other musical performers, are not altogether unlike those on athletes, and high-risk aspects of physical performance uniquely combine in the case of opera with possibilities of dramatic expression to make it an exceptionally difficult enterprise, and all the more powerful when it goes well.
W. H. Auden said that ‘in a sense, there can be no tragic opera’, because singing in itself too evidently seems a free and enjoyable activity: ‘the singer may be playing the role of a deserted bride who is about to kill herself, but we feel quite certain as we listen that not only we, but also she, is having a wonderful time’. The judgment about tragedy might be disputed, but Auden’s remark contains an important truth about the aesthetics of opera.
Particularly in the Italian style, it presents its audience immediately with musical artistry and achievement, and so, more generally, with an obvious artifice – conventions of musical form and performance that are not transparent, as blank verse can sometimes be, but constantly manifest. Because of this, there is a particular technique available to the operatic composer, which is that of securing an effect through the audience’s consciousness that this is what is happening. A theatrical device is made to work, not by concealing it, but by securing the audience’s complicity in it. This technique is not peculiar to opera, but it is specially important to it, and its importance is connected to the point that operas do not have to have dramatic or musical depth in order to be worth seeing over and over again. When one sees an effective opera again, not because it is the kind of work that one might understand more deeply on further experience of it, but just because one wants to see a good performance, its enjoyment at the level of drama is often increased by this sense of familiarity, of seeing the wheels of artifice turn.
The master of this technique is Puccini. He is an immensely popular opera composer, and his works are staged by every opera house. He had outstanding melodic gifts and was a notably inventive orchestrator. The libretti of his operas (several by Giacosa and Illica) are ingeniously constructed. Yet his critical reputation is not as unqualified as his success, and many, while acknowledging his achievement, find it hard to dismiss a distinct sense of the cynical and the manipulative about it. All his major works are sentimental or melodramatic or both, and while ‘melodrama’, etymologically speaking, is what all opera must be, the term in fact carries a limiting sense which, in Puccini’s case, is compounded by the fact that the melodrama is not at all innocent. His consciousness that he came at the end of a long tradition, together with the taste for cruelty which he himself called his ‘Neronian instinct’, means that Tosca or Madam Butterfly is a very long way from Un ballo in maschera. It is hard to think of a parallel in any other art to enduring works that are at once as effective and as dubious as these. The secret of their working so well is that their skill and their very selfconsciousness play into the audience’s experience of opera as performance. In enjoying these familiar works, part of the pleasure lies in the sense of seeing Puccini do the trick again. In relying so ingeniously on this sense, he was exploiting something that is inherent to some degree in the performance of any opera, and that is why his talent, suspect as it is, is true to the nature of the form.
The case of Puccini, and the relation of his achievements to opera as performance, are important for the aesthetics of opera. In his path-breaking work of opera criticism, Opera as Drama, Joseph Kerman was particularly and quotably scathing about Tosca as he was also about Der Rosenkavalier. It is certainly important for the critic to mark off these triumphant examples of, respectively, sensationalism and kitsch from such works as The Marriage of Figaro or Tristan or Don Carlos. Yet it is probable that Tosca and Der Rosenkavalier will be popular with opera lovers as long as there are opera-lovers, and rightly so. If they are not unqualifiedly masterpieces, they are masterpieces of opera. It is very characteristic of opera that this should be possible. Because opera is musical drama, some of its works can bring these resources together to achieve a power unsurpassed in the dramatic arts. At the same time, opera is musical performance, and this does not merely have its consequences for the practice of opera-going, for the loyalties of its audience, and for the kinds of interest that enthusiasts can appropriately take in it.
It has its own implications for the opportunities that opera can offer its creators.
Bibliography
Auden, W. H., ‘Notes on Music and Opera’, in The Dyer’s Hand (London, 1963) Auden, W. H., ‘The World of Opera’, in Secondary Worlds (London, 1969) Burney, Charles, The Present State of Music in Germany (London, 1775) Burney, Charles, General History of Music, 4 vols (London, 1782–9) Kerman, Joseph, O pera as Drama (New York, 1956) Kivy,Peter, Osmin’s Rage: Philosophical Reflections on Opera,Drama and Text (Princeton,1988) Robinson, Peter, Opera and Ideas: From Mozart to Strauss (New York, 1985) Wagner, Richard, writings on music and drama, see the references in the notes to chapter 9, ‘Wagner and the Transcendence of Politics’
Don Giovanni as an Idea
Giovanni is Don Juan, but he does not have to bear the weight of all the significance which that mythical figure has come to express. Still less does Giovanni have to be pursued, as though by another Elvira, with every interpretation that has been given of Don Juanism as a psychological category: that it expresses latent homosexuality, for instance, or hatred of women, or a need for reassurance. Any of these may be true of the local womaniser, but he is not Giovanni, and these states of mind are not what Don Giovanni expresses.
Some later Don Juans, elaborated as they all are with a vast variety of metaphysical, social or psychological reflections, are closer relatives of Giovanni than others. Most remote are the negative, melancholic or merely frantic embodiments of the hero: fleeing from exhaustion and inner emptiness, in Lenau’s representation, or, according to George Sand and Flaubert, engaged in a despairing hunt for a genuine encounter with another person. These, at any rate, are not Giovanni, who is as unambiguously and magnificently removed from despair and boredom as it is possible to be. At the climax of the opera, his words are in praise of women and wine, ‘sostegno e gloria d’umanità’ (‘support and glory of mankind’), but his music encompasses a larger praise of life and humanity themselves.
This chapter is concerned only with Giovanni’s closer relatives in the tradition. Moreover, it is interested in them only insofar as they seem to help in thinking about the opera. They are, of course, rarely independent of the opera. Later writers have not simply gone back to some archetype of Don Juan, or taken Mozart’s opera merely as one previous embodiment of that character, but have in many cases been quite specially influenced by the opera. Indeed, nineteenth-and twentieth-century thoughts about Don Juan have been dominated by Mozart’s embodiment of him. This is not merely because the opera is by far the greatest work given to this theme. It is also because the opera is in various ways problematical, and because it raises in a challenging way the question of what the figure of Giovanni means. Hence, not only is the opera the historical starting-point of many modern thoughts on this subject, but some of those thoughts lead directly back to the problem of understanding the opera itself.
What are we to make of Giovanni? The opera is named after him, it is about him, it is he who holds together a set of scenes in other ways rather disconnected. He is in a deep way the life of the opera, yet the peculiarity is that such character as he has is not really as grand as that implies: he expresses more than he is. He seems to have no depth adequate to the work in which he plays the central role. He has, in a sense, a character – to a considerable extent a bad one. But we are not given any insight into what he really is, or what drives him on. We could not have been: it is not that there is something hidden in his soul. It is notable that he has no self-reflective aria – he never sings about himself, as Mozart’s other central characters do. We have no sense of what he is like when he is by himself. He is presented always in action – the action, notoriously, of a seducer. The facts that the opera is of great and unsettling power, that a seducer is at the centre of it, and that the seducer is virtually characterless were brought together in one of the first and most important reflections on the wider significance of the work, Søren Kierkegaard’s famous essay ‘The Immediate Stages of the Erotic, or The Musical Erotic’. It was one of a set of essays that he published in 1843. They were not published under his own name; Kierkegaard appears under a pseudonym, and even under this he claims only to introduce two sets of papers, by authors ‘A’ and ‘B’. The papers of ‘A’ present an aesthetic view of life, those of ‘B’ an ethical view. The disjunction between the two views – the ‘Either/Or’ of the book’s title – is left before the reader. Through all this indirection, the account of Don Giovanni is of course Kierkegaard’s; but the authorial evasions are important, and they encourage him, or permit him, to leave a central question unresolved.
It is important that Kierkegaard is writing about Mozart’s opera, and not merely about the character of Don Juan in general. This is not simply because he regards Mozart’s as the greatest embodiment of the character.
Beyond that, he thinks that it is a basic truth about the character that this should be so, a truth which he tries to explain. Mozart’s is the greatest embodiment because of a perfect match of medium and content: music is the most ‘abstract’ of the arts, and is therefore ideally suited to express the abstract principle of sensual desire itself. And since that principle is what, above all, music expresses, Don Giovanni will also be the greatest work of music, a consequence which, amid a good deal of ironical self-reproof about the absurdity of such judgments, Kierkegaard (or rather his surrogate ‘A’) more or less allows himself.
Giovanni is the spirit of sensuous desire. He is (in a characteristic phrase) ‘flesh incarnate’. He represents the third, full and final stage of three forms of sensual interest, each of which has been represented by Mozart. The first, ‘dreaming’, is expressed in the tranquillity, the ‘hushed melancholy’, of Cherubino’s feeling; the second, ‘seeking’, in Papageno’s craving for discovery. Giovanni combines and goes beyond both of these attitudes, in full desire, in conquest. He is a seducer, yet it is not really he who seduces – rather ‘he desires, and that desire acts seductively’. His is no particular or individual voice. It is the voice of all desire, and it speaks to all women: it is heard ‘through the longing of all womanhood’. This is why Zerlina, the one woman whose attempted seduction is actually enacted for us, is rightly, and intentionally, an ‘insignificant’ character. Yet this conclusion itself raises a doubt. Zerlina has less to her than the other two women, and what in her responds to Giovanni – to his charm, his desire, and, as is made perfectly clear, his rank and money – is nothing very deeply hidden.
Giovanni had been called upon on other occasions, surely, to exercise that more searching appeal of the stranger, which is brilliantly evoked in the novel by John Berger called G. , one of the latest re-enactments of the Don Juan theme – and also one in which the figure appears at his most anonymously impersonal:
The stranger who desires you and convinces you it is truly you in all your particularity whom he desires, brings a message from all that you might be, to you as you actually are. Impatience to receive that message will be almost as strong as your sense of life itself. The desire to know oneself passes curiosity. But he must be a stranger, for the better you, that you actually are, know him, and likewise the better he knows you, the less he can reveal to you of your unknown but possible self. He must be a stranger.
In Zerlina it is no great distance to her unknown but possible self. It is a pity, one might feel, that Mozart did not enact for us the seduction of Donna Elvira – still more, of Donna Anna. According to E. T. A.
Hoffmann’s famous story, he did. Hoffmann represents Anna as actually seduced by Giovanni, and this fact as the ground of her response to him: ‘She was not saved! when he rushed forth the deed was done. The fire of a superhuman sensuality, glowing from Hell, flowed through her innermost being and made her impotent to resist. Only he, only Don Juan, could arouse in her the lustful abandon with which she embraced him.’ The idea that Anna succumbed to Giovanni had been anticipated by Goldoni; but the significance that Hoffmann gives to this idea, and the consequences of it for the character and power of Giovanni, are what make Hoffmann’s tale more than an anecdotal extension of the traditional plot. Kierkegaard writes,
But what is this force then by which Don Juan seduces? It is the power of desire, the energy of sensual desire. He desires in every woman the whole of womanhood, and therein lies the sensually idealizing power with which he at once embellishes and overcomes his prey. The reflex of his gigantic passion beautifies and develops its object, who flushes in enhanced beauty by its reflection. As the fire of ecstasy with its seductive splendor illumines even the stranger who happens to have some relation to him, so he transfigures in a far deeper sense every girl, since his relation to her is an essential one. Therefore all finite differences fade away before him in comparison with the main thing: being a woman.
He rejuvenates the older woman into the beautiful middle-age of womanhood: he matures the child almost instantly: everything which is woman is his prey. On the other hand, we must by no means understand this as if his sensuality were blind; instinctively he knows very well how to discriminate, and above all, he idealizes.
The idea that Giovanni is in pursuit of the ideal was to have a good deal of later history; a similar representation of his aims was given by Théophile Gautier, who wrote, ‘It is not vulgar debauchery that drives him on; he seeks the dream of his heart with the obstinacy of a Titan who fears neither thunder nor lightning.’ It is one way of trying to express the true conviction that Giovanni, in his musical embodiment, means more than Giovanni, in his character as tireless seducer, could actually manage to be.
But it does that in the wrong way. It betrays the opera by still resting firmly in the terms of masculine pursuit. The feminine appears still as an object, even though it is idealised – perhaps all the more so because it is idealised.
That result cannot be adequate to Mozart’s work. Don Giovanni is a story about a seducer, indeed about the seducer, and has him as hero, but no sensible person could think that it was a work that represented women as more passive than men, or as deriving the point of their existence only from being the object, especially the idealised object, of some essentially masculine principle. This is above all because it gives such a powerful sense of the individuality and the desires of the women in it.
The Romantic airlessness of ‘the ideal’ suffocates both the individuality and the desires of women. It has been suggested, in fact, that there is just one respect in which the seducer – the real seducer, who pursues women and not the ideal – is one who himself affirms the liberty of women: though he exploits or even destroys them, he does decline to imprison them in a possessive institution. Although he ‘has’ them or ‘makes’ them, he does not make them his. The catalogue, as Jean Massin has said, is the negation of the harem.
If we are to give Giovanni his full stature, the erotic principle with which he is identified needs to be taken in some sense which is more general, and at the same time more honestly realistic, than the pursuit of the ‘feminine ideal’. Kierkegaard himself seems to realise this, for later in his essay Giovanni is associated more generally with ‘exuberant joy of life’. All the other characters have, compared with him, only a ‘derived existence’: he is ‘the life principle within them’. It is the idea of Giovanni as a principle of vitality which explains, for instance, Leporello’s attachment to him: he is absorbed, involved, swept up by him. Some idea of Giovanni as embodying the ‘life force’ is of course also what Shaw offers in Man and Superman; but in that enactment, seductive power and attractiveness have been replaced by a boundless loquacity, and the life force is extinguished among disquisitions on Darwinism and mournfully parochial paradoxes about the predatoriness of women. The preface of the play is only too appropriately subscribed, ‘Woking, 1903’.
Now that Giovanni has come to be identified with something as general as the living principle of all the characters, the centre of their vitality, a difficulty arises; and since that identification has something right about it, and expresses convincingly Giovanni’s musical relation to the rest of the opera, it is a real difficulty, which everyone has to face. Has Giovanni any longer a relation to either the social order or an order of divine judgment?
When he was just a finite and particular kind of sexual brigand, there was no mystery in the idea that he should be hunted, prosecuted or damned; but when he has taken on this larger and more abstract significance, is there anything left to the idea of an order against which he is to be judged?
In particular, what do we make of his end?
There is no clear or adequate answer to this question in Kierkegaard’s own essay. He indeed notably plays down Giovanni’s nastiness – he denies that he is really a schemer or even a deceiver, just because he is always energy in action, unselfconsciousness. When Giovanni becomes as idealised as this – so that he seems an innocent, the Erdgeist, a male, active, and unvictimised Lulu – the question of the order that condemns him becomes a very pressing one. Kierkegaard tell us, in effect, only that Giovanni is opposed to the spirit of Christianity, which is also (by a highly Hegelian identification) reflective spirit. This leaves us with an excessively blank fact, that Giovanni is breaking Christian laws and that is why he is punished. But that hardly says enough, even to Christians, if Giovanni indeed represents everyone’s living principle. Kierkegaard himself perhaps escapes this criticism because he offers us in the essay only the view of ‘A’, the aesthetic view of life, and it is hardly surprising that he gestures only remotely towards the ethical. But the ethical will have to be got into closer relation to Giovanni than this, if Giovanni is everything that ‘A’ says that he is.
In distinguishing Mozart’s Giovanni from an intriguer, Kierkegaard explicitly distinguishes him from Molière’s Don Juan. That figure is driven particularly by the fear of boredom; the attempt to overcome satiation.
Molière is mainly responsible for the idea of Don Juan as the amatory strategist, the hunter who is above all concerned with the tactics of the chase. It was a theme taken up later by Stendhal, who himself, however, finally pronounced in favour of Werther as opposed to Don Juan, the sentimental rather than the strategic. Stendhal’s contrast, of course, relates simply to love – as something made, at any rate, if not felt. But the ruthless pursuer of love can come to represent, rather than one type of lover, one type of pursuer.
Simone de Beauvoir has said, ‘If existentialism were solipsistic, the adventurer would be its perfect hero’, and Giovanni is one type of the adventurer. He is a kind of nihilist, on this reading: one who indeed denies God and the fetishism of conventional moral approval and social rewards, and who lives through free action for its own sake. He represents ‘the union of an original abundant vitality and reflective scepticism’, but unlike the genuine and committed existentialist hero he has no sense of freedom as something all should share, and hence, like an adventurer in another style, Pizarro, he has contempt for other people. At the same time, he is dependent, dialectically, on social institutions which he rejects – wealth, and the liberty given by class.
Da Ponte constantly reminds us that Giovanni is a member of the nobility and that he deploys his rank and, as he himself very explicitly asserts, his money to get what he wants. He belongs of course to the equally noble world of Don Ottavio and Donna Anna, but we are left in no doubt what his contempt is for such a world, as a social order. When Masetto sees Zerlina being taken away from him by Giovanni and is prevented by Leporello from following, his outburst, ‘Ho capito’, combines the pains both of love and of social insult.
Formally there is a parallel here with the relations of Figaro and the Count, but there is also a basic difference. It is not only that Figaro is a complete person whereas Masetto is a more schematic and simpler character. Still less is it that Giovanni is the hero of his opera, while the Count is the villain of his – that oversimplifies our relations to both of them.
Giovanni is not a hero we enter into, whereas, very strikingly, the point at which we are given the deepest and most sympathetic insight into the Count is in that aria (‘Vedrò, mentr’io sospiro’) in which he expresses the rage of baffled class power. The difference between the operas is that the Count and Figaro totally belong to the social world in which they are presented, and their motivations are naturally related to that world, whereas Giovanni is only making use of the social world in which he was born, and is basically a solitary figure who exploits but does not belong to his social surroundings. He is a brigand within his own country. He is at ease in being so, and Mozart is at ease in representing him so. While Giovanni is using his position, there is surely no ambivalence in it, or in the opera’s attitude to it, such as Ernst Bloch suggested, who found in it the mark of ‘a strangely ambiguous titanism’ (‘eines merkwürdig gesprenkelten Titanismus’), and asked, ‘Is Don Giovanni, as Mozart shows him, a wolf or a human face under so many masks? Does he belong fully to the society of the ancien régime, as its most ruthless representative, or do we detect in him, in the erotic explosive rebellion, part of a return to nature?’ Giovanni certainly lives off the land, but does so in an individual way that firmly refuses any such historical question. That he exploits others is identified by Simone de Beauvoir as a contradiction in the adventurer’s situation – he both denies and affirms the need of his social background. But this is so, surely, only if he intends, or someone intends, his style of life to be an expression of freedom as something which everyone might try to follow. Giovanni himself entertains no such aspiration, nor does he reject it: he is not reflective in that style at all.
Nor in any other. It is this that marks him off from another great embodiment of reckless human energy with whom he has indeed been associated, Faust. A German author, Christian Dietrich Grabbe, produced in a play ( Don Juan und Faust) which brought the two heroes together, a meeting which involves the following rather plodding exchange: Don Juan: Wozu übermenschlich
Wenn du ein Mensch bleibst?
Faust: Wozu Mensch
Wenn du nach übermenschlichem nicht strebst?
( Don Juan: What is the point of the superhuman If you remain man?
Faust: What is the point of man
If you do not strive for the superhuman?)
Such solemnities do not belong to the world of Giovanni. Even without them, Faust’s undertaking, because it is essentially reflective, differs from Giovanni’s. It is not merely that he is a scholar and an experimentalist, though that is true, and his attitude to Helen or Gretchen is of that kind.
He loves or seduces as an experiment or an experience, in order to have done so, and that is the opposite of Giovanni, who simply says that he needs women ‘more than I need the food that I eat or the air that I breathe’.
More basically, Faust’s whole bargain – what makes him the over-reacher he is – is reflective: it is a product of the calculation of the values of finite and infinite, and that is not a kind of enterprise known to Giovanni. As Camus remarked, Giovanni does not really believe in the after-life, unlike Faust, ‘who believed enough in God to sell himself to the devil’.
But this leads us back to the questions about Giovanni’s end; and whether it is, despite the opera’s first title, Il dissoluto punito, a punishment. If the Commendatore is the veritable voice of Heaven, a Christian Sarastro so to speak, then Giovanni’s defiance of him, the refusal of repentance in the face of a manifest miracle, is awesomely perverse. The celebra- tion of Giovanni as Promethean hero, or – as by Musset and by Baudelaire, for example – as a figure of fascinating satanic evil, will then be in place.
But Giovanni is not a satanic evil figure, and the extraordinary power his musical image expresses is not that of a tragic hero either. Camus is again to the point:
Don Juan would find it natural that he should be punished. It is the rule of the game. And it is exactly a mark of his generosity, to have entirely accepted the rule of the game. But he knows that he is right, and that there can be no question of punishment. An inevitable end is not the same thing as a penalty.
If Giovanni’s wilful defiance does not have a luciferian significance, then what he is defying cannot be God. The Commendatore in stone is on any showing an impressive figure: Shaw said that those trombones were ‘a sound of dreadful joy to all musicians’. But his is not the voice of God. He is made of stone, and he does not come from Heaven (whatever he says about his diet), but from the churchyard where we first heard him. He is a terrible and unforeseen natural consequence of Giovanni’s recklessness.
He is indeed supernatural, but only in the sense of a realm of cause and effects which lie beyond the natural, not one that brings a new order of guilt and judgment. Giovanni’s lofty refusal to repent when the statue demands that he should is not an ultimate offence to the cosmic order, but rather a splendidly attractive and grand refusal to be intimidated. If Giovanni’s refusal were to be Faustian hubris or Promethean defiance, as some Romantic writers wanted, it would have to be something that he had come to after consideration. Mozart’s tempi reveal it as convinced, but not as considered. The Commendatore’s Andante gives Giovanni time to repent, but he does not give himself time, and could not do so. He is always in action; even when he is resting from one adventure, he is in flight for the next. His natural speed, throughout the opera, is that of ‘Eh via buffone’ (rather slower than ‘Fin ch’han dal vino’, a piece designed to show that even he can accelerate). That speed is not right for reflection; and no composer has ever found it the right speed for Faust. Shaw’s Don Juan, by contrast, becalmed in that limitless lagoon of talk, loses his entire raison d’être.
The Commendatore does not need to be the voice of God; and the devils’ chorus scarcely could be the sound of the Christian Inferno. The final sextet even refers to the place to which Don Giovanni has been removed, not by any Christian phrase, but in terms of the old creaking classical machinery of Proserpina and Pluto: Da Ponte attached no very great weight to that, no doubt, but it is quite right. Those old gods were themselves part of nature, and Giovanni’s great virtue of courage, which he expressly boasts in his last moments, is displayed in a marvellous piece of consistency, of sufficiency, of bravado – a very proper and fine human reaction to something which, granted indeed his wicked life, is of the order of a vast and alarming natural consequence, rather than a transcendental judgment.
Curiously, each of Mozart’s great Italian comedies has something unsatisfactory or problematic about its end. None of them perfectly solves the problem raised by its own depth – the problem of relating to the defining normality of comedy the intensity that the work has given to the irregular.
Each promises a return to normality which it fails to define properly; each embodies some emotion which does not quite match the past or the future. In Figaro, there is the problem that at the end of the ‘mad day’, the Count and the Countess express reconciliation and forgiveness in music of such rapturous beauty that it can only be saying that all will be well for ever, when we know, from everything we have seen, that it cannot be for more than a week. In Così fan tutte, everybody is rattled back to their right partners in a manner which, granted what we have just been shown, can only be totally heartless. In Don Giovanni, the final sextet represents, very explicitly, a return to ordinary life. Should we take that to mean a return to the ordinary as against the supernatural, which has just done its work?
Or a return to the decent with the end of the wicked?
There is certainly a return to the expected, after the intervention of the extraordinary. But that return does not define what has disappeared as simply wicked, indecent or unnecessary. In fact, the characters, with the exception of Zerlina and Masetto, scarcely do ‘return to normal’, but rather try to stick something together from what is left now that Giovanni has gone. Life without him will not merely be life with the wicked satisfactorily punished. Although his punishment is the subject of the closing words of the finale, and the moral of its ‘antichissima canzon’, Mozart has already shown us that life without Giovanni will be life that has lost a very powerful and single-minded embodiment of qualities which are indeed human. Because he was just those qualities, he himself lacked humanity – he was without love, compassion and fairness, to mention only a few of the things that he lacked. But the relation of what he had to what he lacked cannot be adequately expressed simply in terms of vice and virtue, dissoluteness and punishment, and that is something that Kierkegaard’s interpretation half sees – sees, one might say, with half of him; but his essay leaves us, inadequately, still with the punishment as a blank requirement of the Christian consciousness, besides contributing the ultimately sterile idea, favoured by some Romantics, that Giovanni’s pursuit of women was more than it seemed because it was the pursuit of the ideal woman.
Contrary to that, other Romantics found his heroism in a displacement of ordinary virtue: face to face with the cosmic order, he defiantly, tragi-cally or even satanically rejects it. That account of him both overestimates the transcendental character of what he confronts, and underestimates the simply human, recognisable and invigorating quality of his attitude to that confrontation.
The sense of freedom that he expresses does not have all the metaphysical resonances that existentialist writers found in it, but it does have a significance which goes beyond an individual personal characteristic, and so does his recklessness. His single-minded determination to live at the fullest energy, at the extreme edge of desire, neglects consequences to himself as much as to others. Granted what makes life valuable to him, the ultimate consequences are irrelevant: cowardice, for him, would simply involve a misunderstanding of what was worth pursuing, just as consider-ateness (unless things happened to take him that way) would be a distraction. He understands perfectly well that society exists – he can skilfully negotiate its obstacles. He understands that other people exist – how else could he so unfailingly find the ‘unknown but possible self ’ of all those women? He has a perfectly clear idea of what might destroy him – his end is not just a mistake.
That end, however, and still more the essential closing bars of the opera that follow it, both affirm that there is no actual human life that could be lived as unconditionally as his. Those who survive Giovanni – not only the other characters, but, on each occasion that we have seen the opera, ourselves – are both more and less than he is: more, since the conditions on humanity, which we accept, are also the conditions of humanity; and less, since one thing vitality needs is to sustain the dream of being as free from conditions as he is.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Baudelaire, Charles, ‘La Fin de Don Juan’, in Œuvres posthumes (Paris, 1887) Beauvoir, Simone de, Pour une morale de l’ambiguité (Paris, 1961), trans. Bernard Frechtman, The Ethics of Ambiguity (New York, 1967), chapter
Berger, John, G. (London, 1972)
Bloch, Ernst, Das Prinzip Hoffnung, 3 vols (Berlin, 1953–6), part 5, section 49; ‘Don Giovanni, alle Frauen und die Hochzeit’
Camus, Albert, Le Mythe de Sisyphe (Paris, 1942), ‘Le Don-Juanisme’
Gautier, Théophile, Histoire de l’art dramatique en France depuis vingt-cinq ans, 6 vols (Paris, 1858–9), ‘Italiens: Don Giovanni’ (1845) Hoffman, E. T. A., ‘Don Juan’, in Sämtliche Werke, vol. 1 (Munich and Leipzig, 1912) Kierkegaard, Søren, Either/Or, 2 vols (1843; London, 1944), vol. 1, trans. David F. and Lillian Marvin Swenson. ‘The Immediate Stages of the Erotic’; see also ‘Diary of the Seducer’
Massin, Jean, Don Juan, mythe littéraire et musical (Paris, 1979) (texts, with commentary: Tirso, Molière, Hoffmann, Pushkin, Lenau, Baudelaire [in French], Da Ponte [in French and Italian])
Musset, Alfred de, ‘La Matinée de Don Juan’, La France littéraire (1883) Shaw, George Bernard, Man and Superman: A Comedy and a Philosophy (London, 1903) Shaw, George Bernard, ‘Don Giovanni Explains’ (1887), in Short Stories, Scraps and Shavings (London, 1934)
Shaw, George Bernard, The Great Composers, Reviews and Bombardments, ed. Louis Crompton (Berkeley and Los Angeles, 1978)
Stendhal (Henri Beyle), De l’amour (1822; Paris, 1959), chapter 59: ‘Werther et Don Juan’
Rather Red than Black
Verdi, Don Carlos and the Passion for Freedom Don Carlos stands in a special relation to Verdi’s social and political ideals – ideals which were themselves connected at more than one level with the aims of his art. It is those ideals I should like to say something about.
From the beginning Verdi’s work was associated with liberal and nationalist causes. It is well known how in his first great success, Nabucco, the nostalgic chorus of Hebrew exiles, ‘Va pensiero’, became one of the great songs of the Italian aspiration to independence and unity. In the first decade of his work, other pieces, lines or situations in his operas were to be seized upon in Milan or Rome or Venice to the same effect, always to the composer’s satisfaction and often as part of his purpose. At his funeral nearly sixty years later, the vast crowd spontaneously broke into it.
In that decade of the 1840s Italy was divided, and for the most part ruled by foreign powers; and the aim of removing foreign power came to embrace, equally, the cause of Italian unity – Mazzini insisted, an independent Italy had to be a unified Italy. Verdi himself was single-mindedly dedicated to this idea; and when later, in 1859, Lombardy was enabled to join a free Piedmont, but Venice remained under Austria, Verdi was totally disgusted.
It was this cause of Italian unity that the public found expressed in several of the operas of the 1840s. In I Lombardi alla prima crociata, at its first performance in 1843, the Lombards were readily taken as the Italians, the Saracens as the Austrians, and when in the last act the Lombards were incited to battle with the words ‘The Holy Land will be ours today!’ there were enthusiastic cries. Three years later, the line in Attila, uttered by a Roman general, ‘You can have the universe, let Italy remain with me’, set by Verdi in a compelling manner, aroused shouts of ‘A noi! L’Italia a noi!’ and became instantly famous.
The nationalist appeal was not unintentional, though certainly it was not Verdi’s aim to write patriotic operas entirely for their own sake; these were the years of many operas, some pretty crude, and of much drudgery, the time he was to call the years in the galleys, and a lot later his second wife Giuseppina was to imply that his overwhelming aim at this time had been to make money. But that aim did not prevent these works progressively strengthening his art; nor from revealing, if only in choice of subject or emphasis, his nationalist sympathies.
But there was one opera which Verdi wrote specifically to a nationalist theme, encouraged it seems by a letter from the poet Giuseppe Giusti, who reproved him for his choice of the foreign topic of Macbeth, and urged him to accompany ‘the high and solemn sorrow [of the Italian people] with your noble harmonies’. The work that issued from this was La battaglia di Legnano, which was first put on in Rome on 27 January 1849, at the moment of high republican and nationalist enthusiasm. The Pope had fled Rome, Garibaldi and Mazzini had both arrived in the city, and it looked as though the Papal States were about to be declared a republic. The moment, like many other moments of hope for Italian liberty, passed, but it was a fine moment, in particular for La battaglia di Legnano. The work was received with wild enthusiasm, the whole of the fourth act was encored at each performance, and on the first night, when at the end of Act III the hero with a cry of ‘Viva Italia!’ leaps off a balcony to rejoin his regiment, a soldier in the fourth tier threw onto the stage his coat, his sword and all the chairs in the box. This was an opera to which Verdi in later years felt some attachment; at least he felt that he had produced a substantial and independent work of art.
It was not until ten years after this, at the first production of Un ballo in maschera in 1859, that the cry of ‘Viva Verdi’ first took on the particular nationalist significance which it was famously to bear, by which the letters VERDI were taken as an acronym of Vittorio Emanuele, Re d’Italia. By that happy idea, Verdi’s name became almost literally synonymous with that of the figurehead of Italian unity. But it was in the first ten years that his work had conspicuously earned him that association. It had earned it not just by choice of subject and a well-judged emphasis on the appropriate situations. It owed it also, and more deeply, to his style, a style which was direct in its effect and popular in its origins.
Verdi had throughout his life what may rather vaguely be called nationalist opinions about musical style, and in his later years was rather given to saying that Wagner was all right for Germans to follow but not Italians; that there should be not chamber music societies in Italy but more vocal groups; and so forth. It was in the vocal tradition that he identified the Italian musical genius, a tradition he saw going back far beyond the origins of Romantic opera, notably to Palestrina. He saw himself as belonging to and having developed that tradition for his own purposes of dramatic expression. He did not see himself as having invented anything like a new national language, in the sense in which the novelist Manzoni – the man whom Verdi venerated more than any other – had founded a new national language of literary expression in I promessi sposi. Rossini, Bellini, Donizetti had of course already been national figures, nationally admired. Yet the enormous vigour and energy of Verdi’s music represent the tapping of a popular tradition in a way different from anything found in his predecessors. Particularly in these earlier works it showed itself in his use of that manifestly popular form, the chorus. Already in 1844 Verdi was known to the Milanese as ‘the father of the chorus’; and Julian Budden has written, ‘Patriotic choruses, rousing or nostalgic, figure in most Verdi operas from Nabucco to La battaglia di Legnano . . . Naive though they are, Verdi was never ashamed of these patriotic choruses . . . they were written with the greatest sincerity of purpose . . . For him the nationalism of the Risorgimento was the gateway to a wider and grander conception of humanity.’
What then were the conceptions that underlay Verdi’s nationalism? In trying to see something of the view of life and of politics which drew him to that cause, one may also see something of the continuities between the early patriotic manifestations and the passion for liberty which plays such an important role in Don Carlos. Nationalism in Italy was, as elsewhere, deeply connected with the spirit of Romanticism; peculiar features of Italy made that connection particularly simple and direct, the impulse of Romanticism in Italy expressing itself politically as a liberal form of nationalism – there was not much room in the Italian scene for reactionary, medievalising, or paternalist nationalism which elsewhere could also grow from Romantic roots. Verdi was this kind of liberal Romantic, dedicated to ideals of individual as well as of national liberty. He was a Romantic also in his views on the national spirit in art, which I have mentioned; and a Romantic, also, in what he thought about the relations between art, individual expression and tradition – on these matters Verdi’s outlook was in fact, strange though it may seem, almost exactly the same as that endorsed by Wagner in Die Meistersinger.
In a more superficial sense of ‘Romantic’, however, Verdi’s nationalism was not Romantic, and it is significant that the political figure of the Risorgimento whom he devotedly admired was not the solitary and visionary Mazzini nor the adventurer Garibaldi (‘ingenuous’ Giuseppina called him in 1864) but the cautious diplomat Cavour, of whom it has been said that he had middle-class aims and an aristocratic style. Verdi was devoted to Cavour, and it was Cavour who personally persuaded Verdi into the highly improbable undertaking of becoming a Deputy in the first Parliament of a united Italy in Turin.
He was elected in February 1861 after a rather painful misunderstanding with one Minghelli-Vaini, an alternative candidate, which elicited from Verdi the most touchy declarations to the effect that he would not lift a finger to get himself elected – ‘the word “intrigue” does not exist in my dictionary,’ he said. Cavour died in June of that same year, which as well as a blow to Italy was a blow to Verdi personally, and more or less marked the end of his hardly existent political career. He stayed away from the Chamber for more than two years, and then attended very rarely: his offers to resign were resisted. As he wrote to the librettist Piave, ‘If anyone needed to write about my career as a member of Parliament, he would only have to print in the centre of a beautiful piece of paper, “The 450 are really only 449, for Verdi as a Deputy doesn’t exist.”’ ‘I am a liberal to the utmost degree, without being a Red’ – this he wrote in a set of private notes about his grievances against the tiresome citizens of Busseto. ‘I respect the liberty of others, and I demand respect for my own. The town is anything but Liberal. It makes a show of being so, perhaps out of fear, but is of clerical tendencies.’ Two elements here are close to the heart of Verdi’s outlook: on the one hand, a very strong sense of personal independence and integrity, and on the other, anti-clericalism.
His anti-clericalism, which is expressed in Don Carlos as in no other of his works, was notably strong. He seems in any case quite possibly to have been an atheist (or agnostic, given his Christian burial). ‘You’re all mad,’ he would say to Giuseppina when she displayed religious enthusiasm – but beyond that a specific distrust of the Church, as with many liberal Italians, then and now, played an integral part in his outlook. ‘I cannot reconcile’, he wrote in 1870, ‘Parliament and the College of Cardinals, freedom of the press and Inquisition, the Civil Code and the Syllabus . . . Perhaps tomorrow there will come a shrewd and clever Pope, such as Rome has had so many times before, and he will ruin us. Pope and King of Italy – I can’t see them together even on the paper of this letter.’
Although he said, as we have seen, that he was no Red, he could go so far as to say that faced with a choice between Red and Black – that is to say, between the Left and the Catholic Right – he would rather have Red than Black. It was not the colour of the man that he worried about, but his worth, he used to say – not the colore, but the valore. ‘Colours don’t frighten me, but I do believe, and always will believe, that it is men of talent and good sense who keep the world going.’ ‘It is a strange thing,’ he reflected in 1877, ‘that in these times of freedom, no-one feels any more free, nor has the courage to tell the truth.’ Courage, pride, independence, straightforwardness and good sense he admired; vanity, prejudice and intrigue he despised. It was indeed that mixture of middle-class and aristocratic virtues that he admired in Cavour.
Don Carlos is unique among Verdi’s works in the weight and complexity of its political content, and in the way in which that content is related to personal character. The Council Chamber scene in Simone Boccanegra is of similar power – a late addition to that work, belonging to the years of Verdi’s most mature works; but what that great appeal against faction does is to raise to a new level of dignity, and relate more interestingly to individual character, that same ideal of national unity that was voiced in the earliest works. In Don Carlos there is something quite different: a clash between persons which is also a clash of political outlooks which can each be taken seriously. Moreover, there is also a clash within a person, King Philip, which is a product of the use he has to make of his political power, and of the limitations on that power.
The clash between outlooks is centred, of course, in the duet between Posa and the King in Act II of the five-act version – that is, where Posa pleads for liberty in Flanders. This confrontation, central also to Schiller’s play, was introduced into the libretto at Verdi’s own suggestion. And the hard work on composing it made him, he said, ‘spit blood’. There is no doubt who in this duet represents the right side, so to speak; Posa’s music not only here but elsewhere, all the way in fact to his dying cry, offers once more a high expression of those aspirations that go back to Nabucco. That fact, together with the special weight which is conferred in all Verdi’s work by the baritone voice, inevitably makes Posa seem the most serious embodiment of the noble cause, more serious in fact than Don Carlos, whose conversion to the cause of Flanders runs a certain risk by comparison of seeming like a hysterical flight from hopeless love to the Foreign Legion. At best, in his political undertakings Carlos looks like Garibaldi as compared with Posa’s Cavour, Verdi’s hero.
But while Posa is on the side of right, it is striking what weight Verdi’s treatment gives the outlook of Philip, his arguments for tyranny and the pessimistic knowledge which he claims of the human heart. There is nothing unique in Verdi’s finding power and deep interest in a character who is dark and in terms of the drama unsympathetic: Iago came later than King Philip, but many years before, equally, there was Lady Macbeth. What is unique is the weight lent to an outlook which supports tyranny and stands directly against the ideals of liberty and enlightenment. That outlook, moreover, we see – or rather, musically hear – is of a piece with the personal despair which Philip expresses in his aria in Act IV; and that solo, which shows the hopelessness in his own life and affections, leads in turn into the interview with the Grand Inquisitor – a conjunction of scenes which as an expression of the limitations of the King’s power, both internally and externally, is quite extraordinary. The Church, in the person of the Inquisitor, acts as an independent force; we are shown the power it has, and over Philip, when we are shown the Inquisitor’s ability to control events which Philip cannot control. Philip’s dark outlook, as empty as his personal life, is yet not as wholly black as the power of the Church, which is the basis of his power and hence its limitations.
Don Carlos gives a strong sense of a political and social world within which the principal characters move: this is particularly so when the opening scene is restored which places Elisabeth’s marriage in the context of the sufferings of war. This sense of a surrounding world shaped by social forces is no new thing for Verdi: on the contrary, it is an absolutely general feature of his operas that one should feel that the central action, however melodramatic or extravagant, is occurring in a surrounding world of crowds, society, other people pursuing their own lives. It is one of the conspicuous differences between his work and Wagner’s.
However, Don Carlos also displays something else less usual in Verdi: Philip, its central figure – central in the sense that everything revolves round him – reveals a kind of complexity of character and motivation, especially in relation to political realities, which reaches beyond the familiar situation of a person in conflict between two affections or courses of action, to a deeper level. His outlook is darkened, not just by simple misery or simple wickedness or simple despair, but by a cloud of hopelessness which spreads over his personal and his public concerns, so that he no longer understands them properly. This has an implication for his political outlook itself. And part of the poignancy of his relations with Posa comes from the fact that he has no adequate way of fitting together his liking and admiration for that man with the view of the world which goes with his own power and its basis. That kind of darkness is new, perhaps unique, in Verdi. Ambiguity, ambivalence and a character’s lack of identification with what he is doing – these are not in general the materials of his dramatic art: that is another conspicuous difference between him and Wagner.
In an age overwhelmingly impressed by the claims of those elements in drama, this absence raises the question of how it is we can take Verdi seriously (those elements are hardly absent, for instance, from his master Shakespeare). For some works, some passages, the truth is that we can’t: as with much other Italian opera, as also with a lot of old films, there has to be an element of what you might call ‘camp’ in our enjoyment of them, meaning that the enjoyment depends on not accepting the ends that the works themselves had, but, rather, ironically and condescendingly distancing those ends.
But with many of Verdi’s works, including of course Don Carlos, it is beyond question that we can take them fully seriously, and that our involvement in them is unreserved. To try to enquire exactly how and when that can be so would take us too far; for now, we can just notice that when it is so, Verdi’s expression of his characters’ typically energetic and direct reaction to the circumstances, and above all Verdi’s unusual expression of that, creates in the audience a feeling of liberation, a sense of committed and energetic individual action, which is deeply invigorating.
This experience is the basic, central, response to Verdi’s art; almost all other responses to it grow out from, are sophistications of, that one.
In reflecting on that response, we can perhaps see at a rather different level now why it was not just because of patriotic choruses or his own expressed opinions that Verdi was rightly sensed to be the musical dramatist of liberalism. His characters do not need to be expressing sentiments in favour of liberty and honesty: the very method of expression itself conveys the importance and value of resolute individual action, untrammelled response to circumstance, and integrity of character.
Verdi’s work sometimes directly expresses the values he believed in; in its entire conception it embodies them.
It is these same features that contribute to that sense of life which his works, even in their most ingenuous content, convey. Verdi possessed this himself. It was touched on by Boito, Verdi’s collaborator of his last years, in a letter he wrote three months after Verdi’s death. Boito was a highly sophisticated man, more sophisticated than Verdi; when he was young he was sceptical of Verdi’s work but became utterly devoted to him. I will end with some words from that letter: they go straight to the source of Verdi’s strength:
In the course of my life I have lost those I idolized . . . But never have I experienced such a feeling of hatred against death, of contempt for that mysterious, blind, stupid, triumphant and craven power. It needed the death of this octogenarian to arouse these feelings in me.
He too, hated it, for he was the most powerful expression of life that it is possible to imagine. He hated it as he hated laziness, enigmas and doubt.
(Frank Walker, The Man Verdi (London, 1962) p. 509)
The Elusiveness of Pessimism
Responding to the Ring
The Ring, as a text, grew from Siegfrieds Tod, the single opera of which Wagner wrote the poem (and made a few musical sketches) before he conceived the cycle as a whole. In becoming Götterdämmerung, that work was changed in several ways, above all in its ending. Siegfrieds Tod closes, as Götterdämmerung does, with Brünnhilde riding into Siegfried’s pyre, the flooding of the Rhine, and the return of the ring to the Rhinemaidens; but the gods are not overcome, Wotan rules for ever, and Brünnhilde takes Siegfried with her to Valhalla. The change from this triumphalist conception to the work as we have it, with the ending that is announced in its title, is of course deeply connected with much else that has happened in the cycle, and this is borne out by the strong sense one has that in ending like this, the Ring ends rightly.
This is all the more striking because at a mechanical level of the plot there is a problem, which Wagner’s friend Röckel pointed out as soon as he saw the privately published version of the Ring poem in 1853: ‘Why, seeing that the gold is returned to the Rhine, is it necessary for the gods to perish?’ He had a point, since we are told in Götterdämmerung itself (in the scene usually called ‘Waltraute’s narration’) of Wotan’s having said that if Brünnhilde gave back the ring to the Rhinemaidens, the curse would be lifted from the gods and from the world. In his reply to Röckel, Wagner admitted that the destruction was not in those terms absolutely necessary – a clever lawyer, as he put it, could argue that the conditions had been fulfilled – but that what was important was that the audience would feel its inevitability. They would feel it, in fact, from early in the cycle, and when Loge in the closing moments of Rheingold says, ‘Ihrem Ende eilen sie zu, die so stark im Bestehen sich wahnen’ (‘They are hurrying to their end, who think themselves so strong and enduring’), ‘in that moment he only gives expression to our own thought; for anyone who has followed Rheingold sympathetically, not cudgelling his brains over it but letting the events work on his feelings, must agree with Loge entirely’. We, surely, must agree with Wagner entirely: not so much because he was the creator of it all, but because what he said is clearly right.
The end of the gods has in fact been announced earlier in Rheingold. In her dark and impressive intervention, Erda tells Wotan to yield the ring to the giants and escape the curse on it. That sounds like a suggestion of how he might avoid destruction. But, having reminded him that she knows everything, she says, ‘Höre! . . . Alles was ist, endet! Ein düstrer Tag dämmert den Göttern’ (‘Listen . . . All that exists is ending. A dark day dawns for the gods’), and though she follows this with a last warning, ‘I advise you to avoid the ring’, she leaves the prediction behind her, as she sinks into the ground, in a form that may be obscure but is certainly unconditional. She has not announced a bargain or a recipe.
Götterdämmerung is not an ‘if only . . .’ story. In particular, it does not invite us to think how things would have been if only the Rhinemaidens had, somehow or other, got back the ring. We are shown that this is not the point by the incident at the beginning of the third act in which Siegfried himself encounters the Rhinemaidens: a scene more important than its rather arch and hearty manner may encourage one to think. At one moment, Siegfried actually offers to give them the ring, but they will not let him do so until they have told him about its powers and the curse upon it. It will not mean anything for him to give it back, unless he knows what he is doing. But this means that it is not just an ironical accident, but a certainty, that he will not properly give it back, since it is Siegfried’s defining characteristic in this tale that he never knows what he is doing. In asking what sort of story Götterdämmerung is, we should recognise that Siegfried’s lack of understanding is a crucial part of it.
He is the least self-aware, in every sense of the word the least knowing, of Wagner’s heroes. He does not know much about anything, least of all about himself, and a lot of what he does know he forgets for most of the action, under the influence of Hagen’s drug. (The music, of course, forgets those things as well. In a preliminary sketch, Wagner included in the scene with the Rhinemaidens a phrase associated with Brünnhilde, which he later removed.) Siegfried forgets, indeed, more than he strictly should. He cannot remember, it seems, that in his disguise as Gunther he took the ring from Brünnhilde, although he can remember other details of what he did then, for instance that they slept separated by the sword. This curious blank makes the action in the middle of the second act, when Brünnhilde arrives at the Gibichungs’ hall, notoriously hard to follow. But the blank is in fact wonderfully appropriate to him. Violence of that kind cannot be part of the vacuously innocent self-image that he brings to Gutrune.
Although, in his dying moments, the memories of his love for Brünnhilde are restored to him, they do not bring with them any greater understanding, but only a return to a blissful past. In this, and in his relation to these magic drinks, he is quite unlike Tristan, who in his great monologue in the last act comes to see how everything that happened flowed from himself – that he himself, as he says, brewed the love potion.
To Siegfried, on the other hand, the machinery of spells remains quite external, and represents nothing in his motivations or his wishes. It only summarises some of his qualities, in particular his limitless – one might almost say clinical – guilelessness and his destructively simple view of what it is to achieve anything.
His encounter with Brünnhilde did teach him something: fear. ‘The kiss of love is the first intimation of death, the cessation of individuality,’
Wagner said to Cosima; ‘that is why Siegfried is so frightened.’ This gave him a new experience, but nothing to carry forward from it except a blissful memory; and when he reasserts his individuality as a hero and returns to the world of action, there is no project for him except action itself. ‘Zu neuen Taten!’ (‘New deeds!’), is the first thing that Brünnhilde says to him in Götterdämmerung, and, granted that he is to resume the only life he is able to live, there is nothing else for her to say about it. Just because he does not learn, Siegfried is significantly different, also, from Parsifal. He, though more famously a fool, gains something more from his first sexual encounter. Because it arouses in him not fear but guilt, he acquires understanding from it and comes back a changed person, one who can now be a king.
The only person in the world of Götterdämmerung who is or could be a king (in a more vigorously political manner than Parsifal) is, of course, absent from the action. But we are ceaselessly reminded of Wotan’s existence and of his previous struggles, from the Norns’ fragmentary survey of the world at the beginning, to Brünnhilde’s closing words addressed to him, through Waltraute’s and Alberich’s interventions, and by such details as the fact that in the oath trio that ends the second act, Gunther and Brünnhilde swear to Wotan, while Hagen swears to Alberich, Wotan’s dark counterpart. Wotan, unlike Siegfried, does understand – too much, and too soon. In that same letter to Röckel in which he explained the inevitability of the ending, Wagner said that the spectator would also experience it in grasping the feelings of Wotan. Already in the second act of Walküre Wotan cries out that there is only one thing he now wants, ‘das Ende, das Ende’, the end of the gods, to which, he tells Erda in the third act of Siegfried, he is reconciled. He is reconciled to it, however, under a miscon-ception. For at this point he believes that although he and the other gods will disappear, Siegfried in his innocence, and the awakened Brünnhilde, will do something called ‘redeeming the world’. This is presented as an entirely positive conception, its announcement accompanied by the first occurrence of a triumphant motive that will become associated with Siegfried and Brünnhilde’s love.
Do Siegfried and Brünnhilde, by their love or their deaths, finally redeem the world, if not in the positive way that Wotan at that point seemed to expect? It is often said that they do, and commentators have given names such as ‘Redemption through Love’ to the lyrical motive that is prominent in the last moments of the work (a motive that has been heard once before, in Die Walküre, when Siegfried’s conception is announced). But this, like all other names of motives, is their invention, and it is less justified than many such names. Although throughout his works Wagner is fond of words that mean something like ‘redemption’ and applies them generously to various situations of cleansing, or restoration, or forgiveness, or justification, or merely release, no words that suggest a redemption of the world appear among the several things that Brünnhilde addresses herself to in those last moments.
The gold, of course, is now purified, because it has been returned to the Rhine – the only place, as the Rhinemaidens sing at the end of Rheingold, for what is trusty and true: ‘Traulich und treu ist’s nur in der Tiefe.’ The gold, if one insists on the word, has been redeemed. But there is no suggestion that the gold’s return, or these deaths, have also redeemed the world, at least if that means that the world has become a better or freer place.
The future, at the end of Götterdämmerung, is plainly not a concern at all. This is an embarrassment to the political interpretations of the Ring which started with Shaw and have been particularly popular since the 1980s, in many versions ranging from the illuminating to the merely opportunistic. They all begin with a great impetus from Rheingold, with its manifest images of expropriation, self-impoverishment and slavery, but even the most resourceful of them tends to peter out as the cycle proceeds, finding material at its end only for some vapid hope for a politics of innocence.
The problem with this is not that the Ring, as it proceeds, simply avoids politics. It is rather that the hope for a politics of innocence is what it centrally rejects. If one wants transportable philosophical conclusions from the Ring, and Wagner himself insisted that one should not want any such thing, one of them will be that there is no politics of innocence, because nothing worth achieving can be achieved in innocence. Only in the depths, where nothing has been imposed on Nature or wrested from it, is the trusty and true. Siegfried is as near to pure Nature as any active human being can be, and he eventually achieves nothing but disaster.
Wotan does achieve many things, but in deep lack of innocence. Forced back from doing (in Rheingold) to manipulating (in Walküre) to leaving Siegfried free, he chooses to accept his own end in the hope of achieving something by purely innocent means – that is to say, by leaving everything to a purely innocent agent. Götterdämmerung shows how this does not work; and, particularly through the incident of the Rhinemaidens’ refusal of the ring, why it could not work. Human action is significant only if it expresses knowledge, and knowledgeable action is already distanced from pure innocence.
It has been said that the direction eventually taken by the Ring, as contrasted with Siegfrieds Tod, represents a shift from optimism to pessimism: Wagner said it himself, describing his earlier state of mind, a little strangely, as one of ‘Hellenic optimism’. But it has also been denied, and the denial, too, is correct: both sides in this old debate are right. This is not because the Ring is a muddle. No doubt it is, in certain ways, a muddle, but it is not because of its muddles that it can be seen as expressing pessimism and, equally, as rejecting it. That is due to the elusive demands of pessimism itself. What counts as pessimism or optimism is a question that can be pressed at several different levels, and the Ring itself helps to make that clear.
At one level, the mere recognition that there is no innocent politics might be regarded as pessimistic. At a more interesting level, however, it is only after this truth has been recognised that alternatives of optimism or pessimism really come into question. In this perspective, the difference between thinking that there can be an innocent politics, and that there cannot be, is not a difference between optimism and pessimism, but between fantasy and reality. If we start from that point, optimism or pessimism will be seen as attitudes to the life that human beings can live within the borders of reality, borders already set by the imperfection, suffering and confusion that are necessarily involved in any large-scale enterprise. The question of pessimism or its reverse will then be: granted that this is the reality of life, is it worthwhile?
There is more than one way, however, of thinking about what might make it worthwhile. Hegel and Marx, for instance, agreed (only too eagerly, some have thought) that the course of history could not be innocent, but they believed that its crimes and sufferings could be vindicated by its outcome: that it would reach a final state in which history was transcended and the cost of it all would have been justified. A historicist or teleological optimism of this kind is represented in Wagner’s political aspirations of 1848 and, perhaps, in Siegfrieds Tod. That, certainly, he gave up.
Yet there is still another question beyond this, which Nietzsche, for one, saw as the real question of optimism or pessimism: even if life and history have no justifying end, even if the crimes and miseries are never in that sense paid for or cancelled out, could it, entirely in its own terms, have been worthwhile? It is at this level, finally, that the Ring raises the question, and at this level its reply is ‘yes’.
It is indeed often said that Wagner, at some such level, was a pessimist too, above all because he associated himself with the philosophy of Schopenhauer, which not only rejected progressivist readings of history but regarded all willing as painful, unsatisfiable and empty. Wagner did not read Schopenhauer until after he had written the Ring poem, but when he did he saluted Schopenhauer as a great thinker, just because he expressed ideas and attitudes that Wagner claimed to have formed already in his own experience. One can get into complex arguments about possible intimations of Schopenhauerian ideas in the Ring. It is said that one can see in such terms Wotan’s renunciation of his own existence. But Wotan does not renounce his existence because of some metaphysical insight into the nature of action, but as a last stratagem for bringing about what he wants – a stratagem that involves not only (like many stratagems) leaving things alone, but leaving them altogether. Moreover, it is agreed that in embracing his own and the gods’ end, Wotan performs an act of heroic renunciation; but how can such an act issue from cosmic weariness and disillusion? It makes no vast demands on heroism to give up an existence that one has come to see as totally worthless.
To pursue such arguments runs the danger of treating the Ring as though it were a philosophical text. We may be tempted to do so, because Wagner himself, like most of his principal characters, was so relentlessly self-expository. One may be trapped into arguing with his words, because he wrote so many of them, both in his dramas and about them. But it is a large mistake. What matters is the work itself, and when one turns back to that, it is obvious that the Ring defeats, at this most basic level, a pessimistic interpretation, not because of what it says but in virtue of what it is. What the work conveys is that the process of trying to create an artificial, human, order out of Nature, granted all its costs and its eventual failure, is worthwhile simply in its own terms. The Ring expresses this because it elicits as it moves towards its end a cumulative sense of its own complexity, power and achievement.
What this expresses is not (and it is very important that it is not) the idea that life is redeemed by art – the idea that real life, and real suffering, cruelty and humiliation, are justified because they can issue in great works of art. It is doubtful that Wagner believed this even about his own works.
It is not that the splendours of the Ring can justify real life. Rather, the Ring’s celebration of what it has presented can symbolise for us ways in which life may celebrate what life has presented.
It is in some such way that we must understand the peaceable and healing presentation of ultimate disaster in Götterdämmerung and, above all, its celebration, in the funeral music, of the seemingly uncelebratable.
The funeral music is totally retrospective in its effect, and it is essential to our experience of the Ring that it should be so. It is offered as the celebration of the life, just ended, of a great hero. Yet the individual subject of this shattering musical memorial scarcely exists. In Götterdämmerung, certainly, the great hero has done nothing that we can take seriously as heroism, and we have been involved more deeply for much of the cycle with Wotan, a much greater character than he. A strain or awkwardness over this point might be explained by the adaptation of Siegfrieds Tod to the purposes of the Ring. But the important point is that there is no strain.
If we respond to the Ring at all, the funeral music will work on us at least as powerfully as anything in the cycle. How can this be? To say that it is because of the music is to say nothing, since this is dramatic music, and it makes sense at this point only if it makes dramatic sense. It makes sense because we hear it as the celebration not of a man but of a process, of all that has gone before in the Ring.
In 1872, the year in which he finished composing Götterdämmerung, Wagner wrote an essay in which he revised the theory of music drama that he had set out earlier and admitted what he had previously denied: the primacy of the music. In this essay, he said that he might almost describe his dramas as ‘deeds of music made manifest’. Those deeds of music cannot in themselves justify the world of compromise and cruelty, but they can express what it would be like for it to be justified, because they invoke a state of mind in which, at least for a while, the world can seem to justify itself.
Wagner and the Transcendence of Politics
How should we think about Wagner? Those who are troubled by that question, as I am, presumably think that as an artist he is worth being troubled about: that his works, or some of them, are demanding, inviting, seductive, powerful. Not everyone who cares about music need share that opinion. The relation of Wagner to the history of Western music and to the formation of a taste is not the same as that of, say, Bach or Mozart: he is not in the same way necessary. His works are indeed necessary to explaining its more recent history, very obviously so, but they are not in the same way a necessary part of a taste for Western music. Indeed, it is possible for a serious music lover to hate them – but that is not really the main point, since hatred can be a reaction to their power, in particular because of the peculiarities I shall be discussing. So Thomas Mann referred to Nietzsche’s ‘immortal critique of Wagner, which I have always taken to be a panegyric in reverse, another form of eulogy’.
You can have a well-formed, deep relation to Western music while passing Wagner’s works by, finding them boring or not to your taste. But it is clear, equally, that a passionate engagement with these works is not a mistake or a misunderstanding. They are amazing, and there is much to engage with. It is no accident not only that Wagner is voluminously discussed but that immense efforts, expenditure and imagination are still devoted to producing these pieces.
As well as the troubled and the bored and the revealingly hostile, there has notoriously been a further party, of the utterly devoted, and perhaps there still is. Being devoted does not necessarily mean being uncritical, but if the members of this party are critical, it is on the very local basis that the Master did not always live up to his own standards. This party has a question to answer. No-one can deny that some of Wagner’s own attitudes are ethically and politically disturbing, some of them very deeply so. I mean that they are disturbing to us; and by that, I mean that they are rightly found disturbing by people who have seen the crimes and catastrophes of the twentieth century. We do certainly have to understand his attitudes in the context of his time, taking into account the options and ideological contrasts that were available then. We need to understand what his attitudes meant. But, equally, we have to take into account what they have come to mean.
When it is said that ‘we have’ to take such things into account, one thing this means is that we have no alternative if we are not to be misunder-stood. In Shakespeare’s Much Ado about Nothing (V.iv.38), Claudio says, ‘I’ll hold my mind [i.e. stick to my intention to marry her], were she an Ethiope.’ In the Norton Shakespeare, the editor, Stephen Greenblatt, gives an explanation: ‘In other words, black and therefore, according to the Elizabethan racist stereotype, ugly’.2 A review in the London Sunday Times criticised him for this on grounds of excessive political correctness. But as Greenblatt reasonably said in an interview, would they have actually preferred it if he had said, ‘black and therefore ugly’? In Wagner’s case, ‘we have no alternative’ does mean this, but it means something else as well: that we have no alternative to taking into account his attitudes and what they have come to mean if we are to experience and reflect on these works at the depth they demand – more precisely, if we are to understand them at the level needed for them to become a significant part of our experience.
(Indeed, so far as staging is concerned, we have to take these things into account if we are to put these works on at all, and this is a point I shall come back to.)
If we try to understand as a genuine historical question what range of opinions and attitudes was available in Wagner’s world – ‘where he was’ on various matters – we find that in some cases, he was already in a pretty bad place. Above all, and most notoriously, there is his antiSemitism. His article ‘Das Judentum in der Musik’, attacking Meyerbeer and Mendelssohn and, generally, the artistic impotence of Jews, did not make a big stir when it was first published under a pseudonym in 1850. The document had considerably more effect when he reissued it under his own name in 1869, with additions in an even sharper tone and with more directly racist implications (‘so far from getting rid of his errors,’ Liszt said, ‘he has made it worse’). The racist emphasis, influenced by Gobineau, was prominent in other publications of his last years. It has reasonably been claimed that Wagner by his own writings contributed to the resurgence of antiSemitism in Germany in the 1880s, in particular by helping to make it culturally respectable.
Moreover, it was not only during the Nazi time, through the friendship of Wagner’s daughter-in-law Winifred with Hitler, that the Bayreuth Festival, which Wagner founded in 1876, became associated with the most repellent ideas. The house journal, the Bayreuther Blätter, was founded in 1878, when Wagner was still alive, by an acolyte, Hans von Wolzogen, who, as an historian of the festival has put it, used the journal as an ideological instrument to propagate a racist, anti-Semitic, chauvinistic, xenophobic and anti-democratic ideology. It would be difficult to find anywhere in the Western world in the late nineteenth century, even in the darkest corner of the French right, a publication so poisonous, so hate-filled, so spiritually demented.
In some other cases, the attitudes that Wagner held were capable of taking more benign forms, but Wagner’s versions were not among them.
This seems to be true of the particularly chauvinist form that he gave to the idea that there should be a German art.5 Thomas Mann considered this in his famous essay (from which I have already quoted) ‘The Sorrows and Grandeur of Richard Wagner,’ which, given as a lecture in 1933, led directly to his exile from Germany, and which is, along with some of Nietzsche’s thoughts, still the most helpful reflection that I know on these questions.
Mann pointed out, using a distinction made by a Swedish writer, that Wagner’s aspiration was for a German art in the sense of nationale Kunst rather than Volkskunst – that is to say, the nationalism was a matter of the destiny and political significance of German art, not of its materials.
This in itself may seem an entirely intelligible, even innocent or laud-able, nineteenth-century ambition. But then we have to recall that the problem of a distinctively German art, and its relation to a selfconscious artist working in a broader European tradition, had been a preoccupation of German thought since at least the late eighteenth century. Above all it had been a recurrent concern for Goethe, with regard to the German language, its traditions of writing, the public for that writing, the self- conscious cultivation or rejection of differences from the rest of Europe, the relation of German art to various possible political regimes in the German-speaking states, and so on. Indeed, in his writings on these subjects Wagner, unsurprisingly, praises Goethe and Schiller.
Now the German world in the 1860s was certainly a very different place from what it had been in 1800. Yet it is still relevant to point out that in Goethe’s case the question of how to achieve a distinctively German art was a problem for him, a problem to which he responded in ways that honoured its complexity; whereas for Wagner it was, of course, a problem to which, at any given stage of his career, he knew the answer, as against the traitors and enemies who took a different view. This absence of the Goethean spirit, not just in a form anachronistic by the 1860s, but in any form at all, is something I shall come back to when we confront the impression, not lightly to be dismissed, that for all their wonders and power there is an all-consuming assertiveness in Wagner’s works which can be disgusting.
I have moved directly from talking about Wagner’s personal attitudes, as expressed in his writings, to talking about the character of his work. That is not an oversight; the problem is that the two cannot entirely be separated. It is possible that artists with politically disturbing views could produce works that are not politically disturbing. There are without doubt several things wrong with Hans Pfitzner’s remarkable opera Palestrina (first produced in 1917), such as its heavy-handed attempt to present the Council of Trent in the style of Die Meistersinger; but they do not express what was wrong with Pfitzner himself, whose conservative and nationalist views were congenial enough to the Nazis that (to his great resentment) he was required to undergo denazification after the Second World War.
Wagner’s relation to his works was not like this. That is obvious now and has been obvious since they were created, but we shall have to ask what it is about the works that makes this so.
What is troubling is that the problems raised by his repellent attitudes on the one hand and by the disturbing power of his work on the other cannot be solved by a distinction between ‘the work’ and ‘the man’. Or rather, we cannot immediately call on that distinction to solve them. The problems that matter of course concern the work: it is only the fact that we want to take the work seriously that forces us to confront Wagner at all.
But it does indeed force us to confront him, because Wagner’s is a case in which, if we are to deal adequately with the work and its power, we have to take into account the attitudes of the man and what they have come to mean. I do not mean that his views, even his views of his own works, necessarily determine our interpretation of them. His works are independent, in varying degrees, from the outlook expressed in what he wrote around and about them, but we have to ask in every case how far they are independent of it, and in what ways. We need to understand, in particular, how far what moves us in the work may be connected with what frightens and repels us in his attitudes.
Some contemporary approaches to the work, though they are very vocal about Wagner’s attitudes, fail to grasp that this is the question, and fall short of what we need in order to think about it. A lot of writing about Wagner since the 1970s conceives the problem as that of revealing a hidden scandal; the authors try to trace the ways in which the attitudes have marked the works.8 These writers spend a lot of effort, for instance, in trying to find signs of antiSemitism in the operas themselves, claiming that the representations of Mime, Klingsor, Beckmesser and other characters introduce Jewish stereotypes. I am not concerned with the question, still much disputed, of whether the attempts at decipherment of these characters are correct. Even if a nineteenth-century audience did not need as much help in recognising such stereotypes as, seemingly, we do; even if Wagner consciously intended them (for which there is no direct evidence); the point is that these supposed signs are too trivial to help with the only question that can reasonably concern us.
The only reason for worrying about Wagner’s works is that they are powerful and interesting. But if that is so, what difference would these signatures, these local coded messages, make?
In effect, these writers reduce the problem of Wagner’s antiSemitism (so far as the works are concerned) to these supposed traces, to the idea that, in one instance or another, Wagner is knowingly signalling it. This cannot help to deal with any deep anxieties caused by Wagner’s works. In fact, it serves to reconcile these writers’ admiration for them with their bad conscience about his attitudes, but at a painless and superficial level. They have externalised the problem, moving it from where it truly belongs.
We can take an analogy from a quite different work of Thomas Mann’s, Death in Venice: these critics treat the threat, the dangerousness, of Wagner as if it were the outbreak of cholera, which with luck you can signal and confine by whitewashing and disinfecting the walls. But our, and their, real problem with Wagner is not like this at all – rather, it is like Aschenbach’s problem with Tadzio. These critics do not accept at the right level the way in which Wagner is related to his works. They are saying, in effect, that there had better be something wrong with the works, and they have come up with a circumscribed and relatively painless way of identifying what this is.
In a well-known book Robert W. Gutman has written, Unhappily, a proto-Nazism, expressed mainly through an unextinguish-able loathing of the Jews, was one of Wagner’s principal leitmotifs, the venomous tendrils of antiSemitism twining through his life and work.
In his final years, his hatred reached out further to embrace those with black and yellow skins. This attitude cannot be shrugged off as an unfortunate whim or a minor flaw in a musical hero.
This underlines the point that the presence of some anti-Semitic signatures is not in itself enough: they are not going to show that antiSemitism is ‘one of [the] principal leitmotifs’ of Wagner’s work. The works will have to be more thoroughly polluted than that, and in his book Gutman gives interpretations to suggest that they are (though he does less to show that these interpretations are inescapable). But then he is thrown back to the question of why these thoroughly polluted works are supposed to be interesting or important to us. To this, his answer appeals simply to the music: Yet Wagner survives, and primarily because he was a great musician. His ripe late-romantic style retains much of its allure. . . . A music of almost unparalleled eloquence and intimacy keeps his works on the stage.
This is not an answer at all. Having refused to separate the man and the work, Gutman tries to separate the work and its music, an aim which can be seen to be failing already in the use of words such as ‘eloquence’ and ‘intimacy,’ and which is anyway peculiarly hopeless in the case of Wagner, who took unprecedented steps to unify musical and dramatic expression.
If we end up with such an evasion, it is clear that we must start again.
Some modern productions of Wagner’s works have another way of trying to ‘externalise’ the problems. It is a significant fact that we have seen in the opera house in recent years the coexistence of two kinds of radicalism. In cases to which it is appropriate, there is an increasing ‘authenticity’ of orchestral and vocal performance, based on historical research; and at the same time there are productions and sets which display all degrees of rethinking and creativity up to the now notorious extremes of directorial whimsy – which themselves are more or less what has come to be expected.
These two developments might seem to go in opposite directions. It is true, of course, that they can conflict, as when the production makes it impossible for the singers to express what the music requires or invites them to express. (It is important that this should not be described as a conflict between music and drama; it is a conflict between the dramatic contribution of the music and the dramatic contribution of the staging.) But this is a matter of particular failures, not of what is intrinsic to the two kinds of radicalism. Even quite extreme versions of them, if they are put together in the right way, can produce a triumphant success (this was true of Peter Sellars’s 1996 production at Glyndebourne of Handel’s Theodora).
They can combine to the same end. The musical performance tries to offer a closer approximation to the composer’s means of expression; the production offers a version of what this drama, these emotional relations, can mean in terms that make sense to us now – it tries to find visual and dramatic equivalences, which work for us, to the expressive content both of the words and of the music as that music is now presented to us. No theatrical presentation of the drama that was simply determined by historical research could possibly do that.
In fact, the idea of a theatrical production of an opera which is ‘authentic’ in the sense in which musical performances can aim to be ‘authentic’ (and that itself, of course, raises large questions which are not the concern here) seems to be virtually nonsensical. Critics who attack what they see as the extreme innovations of recent directors and call for ‘traditional’ productions of the Ring cannot mean that we should be given what Wagner in 1876 in Bayreuth actually had – for one thing, we know what Wagner thought of what he got in 1876.10 But quite apart from that, since the question is one for us, of what we should do, even the most devoted intentionalist will have to ask not what Wagner wanted granted the resources he had, but what he would have wanted if he had had our resources; and that means of course, also, resources to present his works to audiences who have seen what we have seen (and not only on the stage). We are back, unsurprisingly, where we started, with the problems of staging Wagner’s works for us now. In pursuit of a truthful production, there is absolutely no alternative to re-creation.
The objection to some recent productions of Wagner is not that they are in a new idiom, but rather that they do not use that idiom to re-create.
What some of them offer is mere comment. Unlike the decipherment of the supposed anti-Semitic signatures, which I have just considered, the ideologically critical treatment of the works in these productions is not minor or episodic. Their comments may be continuous, as when Wotan is throughout represented as a tycoon in the 2000 Bayreuth production of the Ring. The problem arises if they are no more than comments, external to any response to the content of the works; in that case, they are like the supposed decipherment of anti-Semitic messages.11 Just as being given a decoding of Beckmesser’s vocal style as Jewish, even if it were correct, would do very little to help one understand or shape one’s reactions to Die Meistersinger, so a continuous subjoined ethical health warning added to the Ring – the mechanical injection into it of modern hate-figures, for instance – does not help one to face what the Ring, both for good and for bad, requires one to face.
We have to address the works and the problems they present on a larger scale. We have to ask: what general features of Wagner’s style contribute to the problems? I should like to suggest three, all of them characteristics that were mentioned by Thomas Mann.
Wagner shared with other nineteenth-century artists, notably Ibsen, the aim of uniting the mythic and the psychological. One might even suggest – this is my suggestion, not Mann’s – that in a certain sense Wagner is Ibsen inside out. Ibsen succeeded in some of his works in taking realistic bourgeois domestic drama and giving it the weight, the sense of necessity, that one can find in Sophocles; Wagner took myths and medieval epics and installed in them a psychology which is often that of bourgeois domestic drama. There is a basic problem with this enterprise, implicit in Walter Benjamin’s observation that the heroes of ancient tragedy or epic lack an inner life in a modern sense: many, if not all, of those ancient works gravely express a necessity that transcends biographical particularity. To reconcile this fact with a drama for which intensity almost unavoidably means intense subjectivity is a hard undertaking, as many nineteenth-and twentieth-century artists have found.
In fact, there are three levels involved. Besides the mythical or medieval materials, and the explicit motivations and situations of bourgeois drama,
Wagner engages in depth-psychological explorations which are expressed in words and music that go far beyond naturalistic drama. Wagner is most successful in reconciling the mythical and the psychological, so it seems to me, when it is this last element that prevails: when the subjective intensity is so extreme, solitary and unrelated to citizenly or domestic life that in its own way it takes on an authority which is perhaps analogous to that of ancient tragedy. This is notably so in Parsifal and in Act III of Tristan.
Elsewhere he succeeds because he can sustain an analogy with domestic drama which does not need to apologise for itself: an obvious example is Act I of Die Walküre.
Sometimes the analogies are imperfectly negotiated, and even the ‘arts of transition’ of which Wagner was justly proud cannot hold the levels together. I personally think that this is true, at all three levels, of King Mark’s recriminations in Act II of Tristan. There is the problem that the view of the lovers from an everyday social perspective is less interesting at this point than what we have just experienced inside the world of night that they have entered; and in addition, for all the references to heroes and courtly honour, it is hard to dissociate Mark’s complaints from a bourgeois embarrassment, doubtless familiar to Wagner himself. In such cases there are problems for production, but with skill and luck they can be dealt with.
However, there is one central case, the character of Siegfried, in which there is a real vacuum, a collapse at the heart of the work, and the very questionable conception of heroism which is associated with him has, I am going to suggest, a political significance.
Another, and very manifest, feature of the style is that Wagner really did break down in some ways the conventional distinction between the musical and the non-musical. As Mann put it, while the old criticism that Wagner’s music is not really musical was absurd, nevertheless it was not entirely unintelligible: Wagner’s work does in a way fuse the musical and the literary. Mann says about the E flat chord that starts Das Rheingold, ‘It was an acoustic concept: the concept of the beginning of all things. Music has been here pressed into service in an imperiously dilettante fashion in order to represent a mythical concept.’12 This implies that the ‘deeds of music made manifest’ which, as he was finishing the Ring, Wagner said were offered in his work,13 and the psychological/ethical/political significance of the text (or rather, one should say, the action), can only be understood in terms of each other. It is no peculiarity of Wagner that what the work means is not given merely or primarily by the action: it is true of all opera, or at least of all great opera. But Wagner’s style does make the dramatic relations between music and action at once more pervasive and emotionally more immediate. We have already seen one consequence of this, that one cannot adequately explain the power of Wagner by simply appealing to the music. There is another consequence, in (so to speak) the opposite direction: that if someone feels that there is something ethically or politically suspect about, in particular, the Ring, that feeling, whether it is correct or incorrect, is not going to be met simply by appealing to the action or, more narrowly, to the text.
It is a paradox that some defenders of Wagner, having elsewhere extolled the unity of music and text in his works, think it is enough to meet these ideological criticisms by pointing out that, according to the plot, oath-breaking and theft do not pay off. Whatever the hopes may be for recovering an overall sense of the end of the Ring, you are not going to find it in its closing words, and it is a significant point, a point which comes back again to the figure of Siegfried, that one of the most overwhelming and also, I am going to suggest, unnerving episodes of Götterdämmerung, the funeral music, has no words.
Wagner is, more than any other, a ‘totalising’ artist; in any given work, all the elements relate to one underlying conception or tone. Mann, once more, puts this very well, in terms which, from a technical point of view, are no doubt exaggerated, but which express something entirely recognisable:
It is this infinite power of characterization that . . . separates the works from each other, and develops each of them from a basic sound which distinguishes it from all the others; so that inside the totality of the oeuvre, which itself constitutes a personal world, each individual work again forms a self-contained unity, like a star.
Nietzsche said that in any given work of Wagner’s it is as though it were all presented by one impersonator with a very distinctive voice; and, since the biographical presence is also strong, this impersonator may easily be taken for the composer.14 All doubt, duality or underdetermination is either internalised into the action (the characters are represented as undecided or in conflict), or it is externalised, existing outside the work altogether (the work stands against the rest of the world); doubt and duality do not exist at the level at which the work offers itself. The work itself voices or implies total unity and certainty. Because the voice of the work is so distinctive in Wagner’s case, and, once again, the historical presence of the composer is close (for instance in suggesting what the whole enterprise stands against), the sense is not of a world assumed, but of an outlook asserted.
The extreme modernism of Wagner’s later style implies that he is not taking for granted the ethical or social assurances which give structure to many other confident dramatic works of the nineteenth century, such as those of Verdi. But at the same time, though he represents ambivalent characters and actions that have ambiguous or perverse consequences, he was not disposed in the least to the typically modernist development by which ambivalence and indeterminacy become part of the fabric of the presentation itself, so that it is essential to the work that it does not finally tell its audience what to make of it. There are few operas, in fact, that have achieved this effect, but they include two of the greatest among twentieth-century operatic works, Pelléas and Lulu.
I come back to the absence of the Goethean spirit that I mentioned earlier in connection with Die Meistersinger and the project of founding a German art. Part of the suspect quality of Wagner lies in the fact that although he portrays conflicts and contradictions, such as Wotan’s indecisions, his recognition that he cannot directly achieve what he wants, the tensions between power and love, and so on, Wagner’s tone in presenting these things seems to have at each point an indomitable assurance. He is telling us what it all adds up to. This aspect of Wagner’s style can produce fear and resentment; one can have the sense of being locked inside Wagner’s head; and it can also give a sense of fraudulent manipulation.
Moreover, as soon as Wagner’s assurance – the feeling that he thinks he has a hold on what is unconditionally significant – encounters the political, particularly in his trying to transcend it, it can become deeply alarming.
These features and the reactions they arouse may mean that some of his devices simply do not work. But sometimes Wagner’s inventions work when it seems that they should not, and then our resistance (and hence our conflicts) can be especially strong. More than one consideration that has already come up leads us to particular and very central examples of this, the funeral music in Götterdämmerung, the orchestral interlude between the scene of Siegfried’s death and the final scene of the whole Ring. The funeral music is almost entirely retrospective in its effect, and it is essential to our experience of the Ring that this should be so. No-one, I think, could describe it as regretful, or melancholy, or resigned. It is manifestly triumphant. It is offered as the celebration of the life, just ended, of a great hero. Yet, as many critics have noticed, the subject of this shattering musical memorial scarcely exists as a person.
Siegfried is the least self-aware, in every sense of the word the least knowing, of Wagner’s heroes. He does not know much about anything, least of all about himself, and a lot of what he does know he forgets for most of Götterdämmerung, under the influence of Hagen’s drug. Although, in his dying moments, the memories of his love for Brünnhilde are restored to him, they do not bring with them any greater understanding, but only a return to a blissful past. In this, and in his relation to these magic drinks, he is quite unlike Tristan, who in his great monologue in the third act comes to see how everything that has happened flowed from himself. To Siegfried, on the other hand, the machinery of spells remains external, and represents nothing in his motivations or his wishes. If he had any character at all, it would be only a limitless – one might almost say clinical – guilelessness.
His encounter with Brünnhilde did teach him something, fear. This gave him, we are told, a new experience, but it is notable that we are not given much more than the telling of it. There is a good deal of psychological material in the last scene of Siegfried after Siegfried awakens Brünnhilde, and it is of course expressed in the music, but it almost entirely concerns Brünnhilde’s transition from warrior to lover. Siegfried as lover gets new music, but very little of a new psychology. What he carries forward from the encounter is nothing but a blissful memory; and when he reasserts his individuality as a hero and returns to the world of action, there is no project for him except action itself. ‘Zu neuen Taten!’ (‘New deeds!’) is the first thing that Brünnhilde says to him in Götterdämmerung, and, if we take it for granted that he is to resume the only life he is able to live, there is nothing else for her to say. What matters is the absence of an inner life, not in itself the absence of intelligence. Parsifal is defined by a holy lack of intelligence, but in the course of the action he gains an inner life; the confrontation with memory and sexuality that is enacted in such extraordinary terms in the second act changes him completely, whereas to Siegfried nothing significant happens at all.
It is not impossible for a great hero to lack an inner life: as Walter Benjamin pointed out, the heroes of epic and ancient tragedy are often presented with a notably reticent indication of their subjectivity. But it is much harder to present as a great hero one who is simply naïve and unimaginative, and whose great deeds, the slaying of the dragon and the journey to Brünnhilde, are not so much emblems of courage as the products of an infantile fearlessness. This is no Achilles. He appears, moreover, in a drama in which subjectivity, selfconsciousness, reflection, personal ambivalence and so on are pervasive, expressed in the artistic means themselves, and, above all, central to the existence of another character, Wotan, who has a better claim to be the hero.
Because the celebration represented by the funeral music is of the seemingly uncelebratable, there is a crisis of theatrical production at this point.
Recently we have often been given an empty stage or Siegfried’s body lying undisturbed. On the occasions I have seen them, these came out as lame or desperate devices; but it is not surprising that there is desperation.
Critics complain of a wilful, contemptuous rejection of the heroic. But it is not the directors’ fault that there is a failure of the heroic. They are reacting, if inadequately, to a feature of the work which, if it is allowed to emerge, is bound now to seem empty or potentially alarming.
Since there is this dramatic failure, it is a real question why the funeral music can indeed be effective, in fact overpowering; and it is not enough to say that it is an astonishing piece of music, since it is a piece of dramatic music in the deepest Wagnerian sense. I think that there is an answer to the question of how it can move us so much, and I shall come back to this. But the problem that comes first, one that is signalled by the directors’ difficulties, is that of heading off a different kind of message – an implicitly political message – which can readily fill the gap left by Siegfried’s absence as hero. I said that the funeral music, granted that absence, can be alarming.
The reason for this lies in its relation to the political, or rather, unpolitical, aspects of the Ring.
The serene and reconciling motive that appears in the last moments of Götterdämmerung used to be called ‘Redemption through Love’. None of these labels for the leitmotifs has any authority, but this was worse than most. For what, even in Wagner’s overgenerous use of such words, has been redeemed? Brünnhilde of course sacrifices herself by riding into Siegfried’s funeral pyre, but if this is to count as redemption, rather than suttee on horseback, it has to have some further result. She says, ‘This fire, burning my frame, cleanses the curse from the ring.’ Indeed, the gold is now purified, because it has been returned to the Rhine – the only place, as the Rhinemaidens sing at the end of Rheingold, for what is close and true: ‘Traulich und treu ist’s nur in der Tiefe.’15 The gold has been redeemed, if one insists on the word. But there is no suggestion that the gold’s return, or the deaths of Siegfried and Brünnhilde, have also redeemed the world, at least if that means that the world has become a better or freer place. The future of the world, at the end of Götterdämmerung, is plainly not a concern, while the gods have no future at all. This is an embarrassment to the familiar political interpretations of the Ring. They all begin with a great impetus from Rheingold, with its manifest images of expropriation, self-impoverishment and slavery, but even the most resourceful of them tend to peter out as the cycle proceeds, finding material at its end only for some vapid aspiration to a politics of innocence.
The problem with this is not that the Ring, as it proceeds, avoids politics. It is rather that the hope for a politics of innocence is one thing that it seems to reject. If one wants transportable lessons from the Ring, a conclusion to be drawn from the story of Wotan will be that there is no politics of innocence, because nothing worth achieving can be achieved in innocence. Only in the depths, where nothing has been imposed on Nature or wrested from it, is the tender and true. But the nobility and grandeur of the funeral music stand against this. Not because of what it says (it says nothing) but, all the more, because of what it does, it can carry the suggestion that perhaps there could be a world in which a politics of pure heroic action might succeed, uncluttered by Wotan’s ruses or the need to make bargains with giants, where Nibelungs could be dealt with forever: a redemptive, transforming politics which transcended the political.
Such ideas had in Germany a long, complex and ultimately catastrophic history. Politics, or at least ‘ordinary’ politics, the politics of parties, power, bargaining and so on, was seen as something divisive, low, materialistic and superficial, in contrast to something else which was deep, spiritual and capable of bringing people together into a higher unity: something, moreover, which instead of peddling satisfactions, demanded renunciation and suffering. There were two main candidates for this higher thing, art and the nation, or, indeed, the two together.
Such ideals informed the influential conception of the Sonderweg, the idea of a special path that German development might follow, distinct from (in particular) Britain and France; and one expression of the difference lay in a supposed contrast between Kultur, which was German and deep, and Zivilisation, which was shallow and French. (Thomas Mann himself had supported such ideas during the First World War, and still in part sought to justify them in the diffuse work which he published in 1918, significantly called Betrachtungen eines Unpolitischen (‘Reflections of a Non-Political Man’).)16 All the elements of this tradition were to be exploited in a desultory but ruthlessly opportunistic way by Hitler.17 Hitler was far from unpolitical, but he pretended to be, and perhaps himself believed that in him the nation had transcended politics: that the politics which brought him to power and which, together with terror, kept him in it was indeed a politics of transcendence.
Wagner was certainly deeply committed to the nationalist ideals of the Sonderweg, but it is rare in his works (as opposed to his writings) that the will to transcend politics points in a distinctively political direction. Die Meistersinger certainly has political implications; as Nietzsche rightly said, it is against Zivilisation, German against French. Moreover, it invites questions, which it notably fails to answer, about the politics of art. Hans Sachs believes in the judgment of the Volk, and in the last scene the young knight Walther gets their enthusiastic approval, with a composition which, we are told, reconciles inspiration with tradition. Wagner no doubt thought that the same could truly be said of his act as a whole. But in fact nothing in this bland formula, or in the way it is worked out in Die Meistersinger, is going to close the gap between Wagner’s intensely radical avant-garde experiments and music that could be straightforwardly popular as, for instance, Verdi’s was.
The politics of art – the relations of Wagner, his music and the German people – remain at the end of the opera an unsolved question. But the relation of all this to politics in a narrower sense, the politics of government, is not even a question in Die Meistersinger. Although in the last moments of the work (in a notably obtrusive passage, which Wagner seems to have put in at Cosima’s insistence) Wagner gets Sachs to declare the ideals of artistic nationalism, he is careful not to commit himself to what its political implications might be. Sachs’s last words on the subject are ‘Even if the Holy Roman Empire dissolved in mist, yet there would remain holy German art!’ And this in its context can fairly be taken to say that the ideals of German art can survive, even if politics change radically or go badly wrong. This might be called the avoidance of politics.
With Parsifal, the one work that Wagner wrote after he had completed the Ring, the situation is different again. Nietzsche was clearly wrong when he said that Wagner had ended up by prostrating himself in front of the Christian cross. Wagner did nothing of the sort: roughly speaking, he took some coloured snapshots of the Eucharist and used them to illustrate his journey into the psychology of sex, guilt, memory and pain. (He thought that Nietzsche lacked a sense of humour, because he presented him with a copy of the Parsifal poem inscribed from ‘Richard Wagner, Oberkirchenrat’ – as it were, ‘The Right Reverend Wagner’ – and Nietzsche did not find it funny.) But the work does undoubtedly steal some of its resonance from Christian ritual and its associations, and in particular, Wagner’s recurrent theme of a redeemer sustains in this case much of its familiar religious meaning. Indeed, in the magnificent climax to Act III, Gurnemanz, crowning Parsifal as king, uses language so dense with references to redemption and salvation that it has even been suggested that he is addressing not Parsifal but the Redeemer Himself.
Although Parsifal becomes a king, he is not a king over any subjects. Nor does the opera suggest that mankind is reclaiming its identity from religion, as in the more Feuerbachian moments of the Ring. Here we can speak of a genuine absence of politics. What we have is the exploitation of religious remnants in the interests of a drama that operates almost entirely at the level of depth-psychology. This involves a kind of trick, because in places the work has to pretend that the whole of human life is transcended and justified by something higher (as it is represented in the final scene, indeed, literally higher), the Holy Spirit. But the psychological material is so powerful, the symbols of the wound and the spear are strong enough, and, above all, the musical invention is so compelling that Wagner’s Allmacht, his capacities as a magical manipulator, enable him just about to get away with it. The director is left with some nasty problems, but we need not be, and certainly not any that have to do with politics.
It is not an objection to Parsifal that at the time of writing it Wagner wrote increasingly crazy articles tying its story together with themes of racial purity. It might be, for some people, an objection to going to see Parsifal: they might feel that they did not wish to be associated in any way with a work written by a man with such an outlook. That is, as people say, their privilege. But it has nothing at all to do with interpreting or responding to Parsifal, because whatever theories Wagner may have had, they do not structure the work, or surface in it, or demand our attention in experiencing it.
When Robert Gutman, for instance, says, ‘Parsifal’s sudden insight in the magic garden was the realization that by yielding to Kundry he would dilute his purebred strain’, he is not reporting the plot, the text or any implication of the music’s associations. He is simply saying how it might look to someone who thought about little but Wagner’s racist writings. My point here is not to reinstate the distinction between the work and the man, which I have already said is not a helpful device in Wagner’s case. The point is just that one cannot decide in advance, either positively or negatively, what facts about the man, his views and their history may be relevant to responding to a given work. In particular, if we acknowledge its power, it is a question of what it is in us that does so, and in the case of Parsifal we have a good enough idea of what that is to know that it has nothing essentially to do with Wagner’s racist ravings.
In Die Meistersinger, politics is avoided, and from Parsifal it is merely absent, but with the Ring, neither of these is true. The cycle emphatically addresses issues of power, and if at its end it suggests that the world in which they arise is overcome, it is hard not to be left with the feeling that the questions of power and its uses have not so much been banished as raised to a level at which they demand some ‘higher’ kind of answer.
I said earlier that there is an explanation of why the funeral music can move us so much even when we recognise that the supposed object of its triumph does not exist. I suggest that it makes sense because we hear it as the celebration not of a man but of a process, of all that has gone before in the Ring. The Ring as it moves towards its end elicits a cumulative sense of its own complexity and power, and it is this that the funeral music celebrates. The music itself helps to bring this out, as motives associated with earlier parts of the story come to the surface. In celebrating its own fulfil-ment, the work can make us feel that the whole disaster-laden history has been worthwhile.
What this expresses is not – and it is very important that it is not – the idea that life is redeemed by art, the idea that real life, and real suffering, cruelty and humiliation, are justified because they can issue in great works of art. It is doubtful that Wagner believed this even about his own works. It is not that the splendours of the Ring can justify real life. Rather, the Ring’s celebration of what it has presented can symbolise for us ways in which life even in its disasters can seem to have been worthwhile. In these terms the Ring emerges as what it should be, an affirmative drama, and not in a way that invokes a hypothetical and deeply suspect politics of heroism and sacrifice.
The problem still remains, however, whether the part that Siegfried plays in the story can, on any adequate reading, bear the weight that it is required to bear. Some of the strains in the work come, without doubt, from the complex changes of mind that Wagner underwent as he wrote it.
But the problem is not just that the work is imperfect. What really matters is a product of history, that the strains pull us towards a sense of the work in which the transcendence of politics tends to suggest not the absence of politics, but a higher, transcendental, politics, of a peculiarly threatening kind.
This is signalled by problems of theatrical production, and those problems remain even if we come to hear the funeral music as a tragic affirmation rather than the celebration of an embarrassingly non-existent hero.
The questions that emerge concretely as problems for the theatrical director are in any case questions for all of us, if we do not allow Wagner’s extraordinary ingenuity to deflect us from them. Particularly with regard to the Ring, but not only there, it may be impossible, even in our imagination, to re-create Wagner’s works altogether adequately. It may be that the total unity of psychology, myth and morally redemptive significance to which Wagner aspired is an illusion, not just in the sense that it is unattainable – that is true of Beethoven’s ideals of freedom – but because, as Nietzsche said, it is based in some part on a pretence that a set of theatrical, often grandiose, gestures can reveal the nature of the world. If that is so, then to that extent no honest treatment of it can make it work as a whole.
We can do it justice – but then it comes out guilty of that pretence, and justly associated, for indelible historical reasons, with a politics that has since Wagner wrote moved into the gap left by that pretence. Or it can come out less guilty – but then theatrical re-creation will have negotiated this as an accommodation between historical memory, what Wagner tried to bring about, and what we can now, decently and (as we say) in all honesty, accept.
If, at least for some of Wagner’s works, a production which ‘did them justice’ would find them guilty, this will constitute the historical vengeance of the ethical on an artist who uniquely raised the stakes high enough for such a vengeance to be even possible.
Notes 1. ‘The Sorrows and Grandeur of Richard Wagner’, in Pro and contra Wagner, trans. Allan Blunden (London, 1985), p. 100. (In quotations from Mann, I have sometimes modified the translation.) Nietzsche’s attacks on Wagner certainly represent an ongoing deep fascination with him, but some of his remarks may also strike a chord with those who are less involved: ‘My objections to Wagner’s music are physiological objections. What’s the point of dressing them up in aesthetic formulae?’ 2. New York and London, 1997.
3. This is argued by Jens Malte Fischer in a helpful and admirably balanced introduction to an edition of Wagner’s pamphlet, Richard Wagners ‘Das Judentum in der Musik:’ Eine kritische Dokumentation (Frankfurt am Main and Leipzig, 2000). For a review of Wagner’s antiSemitism, see the article by Dieter Borchmeyer in A Wagner Handbook, ed. Ulrich Müller and Peter Wapnewski, translation edited by John Deathridge (Cambridge, Mass., and London, 1992).
4. Frederic Spotts, Bayreuth: A History of the Wagner Festival (New Haven and London, 1994), p. 84. According to Cosima’s diary, Wagner did once tell Wolzogen that he wanted the journal to strike a broad, idealistic note, and keep away from ‘specialities’, such as vegetarianism and agitation against the Jews. See Cosima Wagner, Die Tagebücher, 2 vols (Munich and Zürich, 1976–77), vol. 2, p. 700; cited by Fischer, p. 118.
5. His article ‘Deutsche Kunst und deutsche Politik’ (first published anonymously in a newspaper in 1867, then in book form in 1868) can be ‘interpreted, at least in part, as a commentary on Die Meistersinger’, according to John Deathridge in The New Grove Wagner (London, 1984), pp. 52–3. I come back later to the question of whether Meistersinger is itself expressly political.
6. There is one significant qualification to be made: that neither in this essay, nor (yet more remarkably) in pieces written during and after the Second World War, did Mann, so far as I know, mention Wagner’s antiSemitism.
7. It was a ‘nameless presumptuousness’ in wanting to have something to say about everything that Mann particularly had in mind when he said in a letter to Emil Preetorius of 1949 that ‘there is a lot of Hitler in Wagner’.
8. For instance: Robert W. Gutman, Richard Wagner: The Man, His Mind, and His Music (London, 1968); Hartmut Zelinsky, ‘“Die Feuerkur” des Richard Wagner oder die “neue Religion” der “Erlösung” durch “Vernichtung”’, in Richard Wagner: Wie antisemit-isch darf ein Künstler sein? (Munich, 1978); Barry Millington, Wagner (London, 1984); Paul Lawrence Rose, Wagner: Race and Revolution (London, 1992); Marc A. Weiner, Richard Wagner and the Anti-Semitic Imagination (Lincoln, Nebr., and London, 1995).
The idea goes back at least to Theodor Adorno, Versuch über Wagner, written in 1937–8, first published as a whole in 1952; English translation by Rodney Livingstone, In Search of Wagner (London, 1981.) 9. Gutman, Richard Wagner, pp. xiv, xviii. It is ironical that Gutman drops a condescending sneer towards Wagner’s early biographers for their ‘Victorian delight in bringing ethical standards to bear on artistic affairs’.
10. Wagner did very much like the Parsifal that he got in 1882, apart from a problem with the moving scenery. See Wagner on Music and Drama, selected by Albert Goldman and Evert Sprinchorn from translations by H. Ashton Ellis (London, 1970), pp. 369–76. It would certainly look very strange now.
11. It is perhaps worth saying that I do not think that this criticism applies to Patrice Chéreau’s 1976 Bayreuth production of the Ring, which is widely known on video (issued by Philips). Some of its inventions are gratuitous, but for the most part it embodies extremely sensitive responses to the drama.
12. As Adorno pointed out ( In Search of Wagner, p. 28), the idea that Wagner was a ‘dilettante’ goes back to Nietzsche’s essay ‘Richard Wagner in Bayreuth’, written at the time of the first festival in 1876.
13. In the essay ‘Über die Benennung “Musikdrama’’’ (1872).
14. Nietzsche contra Wagner (Leipzig, 1889), ‘Wo ich Einwände mache’.
15. In Andrew Porter’s translation, ‘Goodness and truth dwell but in the waters.’ See Richard Wagner, The Ring of the Nibelung (London, 1977).
16. Trans. Walter D. Morris (New York, 1983).
17. The presence of this among other cultural legacies in Nazi discourse, and above all in Hitler’s own speeches, is the subject of J. P. Stern’s fascinating book Hitler: The Führer and the People (London, 1975).
18. See Lucy Beckett, Richard Wagner: ‘Parsifal’ (Cambridge, 1981), pp. 52–3.
Comments on Opera and Ideas: From Mozart to Strauss by Paul Robinson
There are a lot of points that I should have liked to take up in Paul Robinson’s very interesting book, which I admire because it extends to opera a serious level of intellectual interest that is taken for granted as appropriate in other dramatic arts but is rarely applied to opera; and also because, even more unusually, it obeys the precept that if you want to understand opera you must trust its music. However, because of the limitations of time, my remarks will be mostly about Wagner and Strauss, and in particular Wagner.
The work of Wagner’s that Robinson considers in his book is Die Meistersinger, and he puts it in comparison with Der Rosenkavalier. By a technique rather similar to that which he applies to The Marriage of Figaro and The Barber of Seville, he takes two works that have something in common (in each case, one work greater than the other) and elicits some differences that he associates with differences in their historical circumstances. In considering opera and ideas, Robinson has in mind throughout opera and the history of ideas.
The resemblance that Robinson finds between the Wagner and Strauss works is of course different from that between Mozart’s and Rossini’s operas; the latter share an author as literary source, the former pair share a structure in their plot, a structure of renunciation. But there is surely another difference, which affects the comparison. Rossini must have known The Marriage of Figaro, and that knowledge affected his work in general, but, as Robinson’s account brings out, it had little distinctive effect on the Barber ; while Strauss has Meistersinger in mind, as he has Wagner always in mind. This is just one way in which Rosenkavalier is immensely historically and stylistically selfconscious, and there are many others, such as the way in which it refers, as has often been remarked, to three different historical periods. There is the time of the action, taken up at least once into the music; the time of the Baron’s waltzes; and the time of the work itself, which – as Robinson rightly says – is rather ambivalently revealed in a lot of its music. All this is replicated in the text, which combines elaborately archaic forms of address with pieces of knowing Viennese reflection hardly available to an eighteenth-century Feldmarschallin.
As Robinson notes, Strauss tries to turn this machinery in the scene of the presentation of the rose to the expression of simple and naïve good-ness and love (as he does in the duet at the end of the opera, a cynical and unsuccessful attempt to borrow innocence from The Magic Flute).
Beautiful as it is, I do not myself find this as successful as Robinson does.
It fails in the same way as Jokanaan’s music in Salome, i.e. it is kitsch. The failure is a lot less drastic, because Rosenkavalier is all, to some degree, kitsch. I don’t go as far as Joseph Kerman’s judgment that the rose scene ‘has all the solidity of a fifty-cent valentine’; Kerman is a puritan who detests kitsch on principle. But if it is regarded as expressive rather than decorative, there is something false about it, because the manifest conditions of its production conflict with what is being expressed.
The point of this is that the vast selfconsciousness of Rosenkavalier – its exploitation, sometimes engaging, sometimes boring, sometimes disgusting, of its own historical situation – means that it is already quite different from any work of Wagner, above all Meistersinger. That is indeed a difference between 1911 and the 1860s. (It is a difference paralleled in that between Verdi and Puccini, except that Strauss can, above all in Rosenkavalier, be seen, if you like, not just as someone who rejected modernism but as a postmodernist avant la lettre, whereas Puccini can’t.) The great historical selfconsciousness of so much twentieth-century art of course itself puts questions to the history of ideas. But it is this, very general, difference, I think, that overwhelmingly contributes to the contrast between these works (even if we grant, with Isaiah Berlin, that Wagner himself, in contrast to Verdi, belongs to the ‘sentimental’ or selfconscious type of artist, rather than the ‘naïve’).
When we take this very general difference into account, we have less reason, I think, to insist on the difference of content that Robinson picks out and tries to explain historically, namely that Meistersinger is social and Rosenkavalier purely psychological. Society is not denied in the latter; it is merely taken for granted, like hundreds of other things in so knowing a work. In a passage from the libretto that Robinson himself quotes, the remarks of members of society are themselves an important element in the Marschallin’s fear of the passage of time.
What is true is that Meistersinger, as against Rosenkavalier, is not just social but political. In the regrettable passage about German art (which Cosima made Wagner put in against his better judgment) it is indeed explicitly political. At the beginning of his book, Robinson says that he has chosen to consider Meistersinger partly because other works of Wagner are too consciously and explicitly related to ideas to bring out the kind of influence or association he wants to illustrate. There is a difference between Meistersinger and Wagner’s other mature works in some such respect, but I do not think this gets it right. The difference is that the text is less abstract and less explicitly philosophical than, manifestly, that of Tristan or most of the Ring or – though it again is rather different –
Parsifal; but this is because the ideas are more directly and unambiguously expressed in the action, which in turn is more locally and concretely political.
Meistersinger is no less a political drama than An Enemy of the People, but it is a lot more as well. Robinson has put it the other way round, by making it a psychological story of renunciation with a social setting, but I think this centres Sachs’s renunciation too much (the reference to King Mark in Tristan at the critical moment in Act III, which Robinson mentions, is in fact deployed, both in words and music, with some wry irony). Sachs is its hero, but it is essential that it isn’t named for him.
Now I would not say that Meistersinger is Wagner’s most political work – but I think that Robinson should. For he says that Verdi’s work is more political than that of Wagner, on the grounds that Verdi often puts before us historically located men of power, while Wagner’s works, with the exception of Meistersinger (and, I suppose one should add, Rienzi), are mostly placed in vaguely medieval or mythological settings. And in this sense Meistersinger is closer to a particular political reality than the others.
But I wouldn’t accept this level of the identification of the political. It seems to me obvious that the most political of Wagner’s works is the Ring, even though it is determinedly unlocated in history. In order to agree with this one doesn’t have to accept Shaw’s or some similar reading of it as an allegorical critique of capitalism. Those elements surely exist in it, as Chéreau’s wonderful centennial production of it – unlike many other such attempts – brought out (not only in its many successes but also in an obvious mistake, that the yet undisturbed Rhinemaidens at the beginning of Rheingold should have been represented as already involved in the industrial complex). The Ring is basically political just because it is concerned in manifold ways with the exercise of power, its possibilities, limitations, necessities and costs.
So, of course, as Robinson well brings out, is Don Carlos, and it might have been interesting if Robinson had brought his comparative method to bear on King Philip and Wotan. But even in that great work, Verdi subordinates matters intrinsic to the exercise of power to the human, psychological and ethical interest of the characters involved in it, whereas Wagner, in the Ring, deploys an action that is structured in part by the long-range concerns and consequences of power, reaching often beyond the consciousness of particular characters. Wotan is unique in the degree to which these facts, and the associated responsibilities, are represented in his consciousness, alongside more ordinary – one might have said, everyday – concerns.
In fact, Wagner runs extreme risks, both in Rheingold and in Walküre, in putting together these levels of concern. It has been said that the Ring under its world-historical trappings is often only a bourgeois domestic drama, and this criticism, if true, would be deeply damaging; unlike the perfectly correct, and non-damaging, description of Aida as a chamber opera with processions. The criticism is false, and the ways in which Wagner holds it at bay would make a revealing study of his skill. He himself said that his art was that of transition, and the musical devices that embody this art are what enable him to move convincingly from domestic to historical or metaphysical preoccupations: one example is the wonderful passage in Walküre in which Fricka finally defeats Wotan in their closely argued quarrel over whether Siegmund is to be defended: ‘Deiner ew’gen Gattin heilige Ehre’ (‘The sacred honour of your eternal wife’).
Wagner’s many critics, those who hate and in some cases, it must be said, fear his art, will cite just this kind of thing as an instance of his powers as a theatrical showman, a trickster, old Klingsor, as Debussy called him, the original inventor (to borrow a title of Angela Carter’s) of the infernal desire machines of Dr Hoffmann. But it is hard to sustain this, I think, if one looks carefully at the way in which the junctions between these various concerns are not just concealed by the music but expressed by it, and also represented in the consciousness of, above all, Wotan himself.
Robinson’s contrast of Meistersinger with Rosenkavalier as social to psychological is confined to those two works and is not, I think, supposed to carry over into any larger comparison of the two composers. But inas-much as he connects this with a change in general consciousness between two historical periods, one would expect it to be more generally revealed.
In that light, there is really a problem, since Tristan, written just before Meistersinger, must surely be one of the most intensely solitary, inwards-turned, unsocial, depth-psychological works ever written. This raises, in fact , a general problem about Robinson’s method: if the difference between two works is to be explained in any way in terms of a more general difference between two periods, then the difference has to extend beyond the two works under comparison. A historical difference might of course be focused more narrowly by its being the case that it shows itself in the way in which a given subject is handled at different periods, and I think that is what Robinson has in mind; but then it becomes all the more crucial to identify what the given subject is. It may be that Wagner could have written a more purely psychological version of the story of Hans Sachs if he had wanted to, but was writing something else. One piece of evidence that he could have written a purely psychological drama of that kind is Tristan.
In fact, even Tristan has a social dimension, a world outside Tristan and Isolde, but it is exclusively located in relation to them. It plays a part in a more general feature of the work, the way in which its three acts relate differently to time. Each act starts with music off-stage, which provides the basis for the opening musical development. The dramatic content of that music establishes for each act a different relation to time. At the beginning of the first act, the sailor’s song, drifting down from high up the mast, looks forward. The constant sense of that approaching future holds the act together.
The hunting horns with which the second act begins relate to the present and to what, they pretend, is happening elsewhere. They tell us, as do Brangäne’s warnings, of something Tristan’s and Isolde’s music denies, that they are surrounded at that very moment by a world of social and personal relations.
In the third act, we have Tristan without Isolde, and it becomes finally his drama. It, too, starts with off-stage music, and this relates to the past.
But it is essential to the power of this work that Tristan cannot be allowed simply to expire on Melot’s sword; he has to pass through knowledge, and his recovery of that is the subject of his great monologue, the climax of the work. That is, above all, why Tristan, though its libretto is more textured by vaguely philosophical ideas than any other of Wagner’s works, is a psychological work rather than a metaphysical one, and is in fact a drama.
I feel that these points about Tristan and the character of the Ring as a political drama both give the same lesson, that the ideas to which a Wagnerian opera, at least, gives expression have to be understood at a level that lies not just below the libretto but below the libretto as musically presented at particular moments. Tristan is a psychological drama and not a metaphysical meditation; moreover, it is not a drama of a triangle, of trust and betrayal, but a drama of the self in time, about the loss of self in passion and the recovery of self in memory. The Ring is a political drama not in a way that excludes the psychological; its whole aim is to integrate the two (there is an eventual failure of that integration, but that is not the work’s failure, it is the failure that it represents). And in each case these features of the work come out only in the experience of it as a musical whole.
I do very much agree with Robinson that the power of opera particularly lies at the intersection of the social and psychological worlds, and in its capacity to express both at once. As he also says, the way in which ideas are expressed in opera is likely to relate particularly to the images they bear of the self, its relations to others, society, time and its own history. But, as I am sure he would agree, the exploration of these matters can be carried to further levels, which go still deeper in the right direction, that is to say, into the music.
A last point: with respect to that exploration, I find it odd that he would say, at the end of his book, that the idea of a positivist opera is almost a contradiction in terms. Of course it is true, if it means an opera that declares positivism; but – whatever people say about Wagner and the philosophy of Schopenhauer – that’s true of any opera and any philosophy. What is in question is whether any opera could express and mobilise for its dramatic purposes a picture of the self and of human life that bore a revealing relation to the picture of those things given or implied by positivism. I cannot argue it here, but there surely is such an opera – in fact two, the two greatest operas of the twentieth century, Wozzeck and Lulu.
The Marriage and the Flute
Tippett and Mozart
In an essay written in 1944 called ‘Contracting into Abundance’, Michael Tippett spoke of ‘the fact of divided man’ and the ideal of ‘the whole man’, and went on to say (as he put it later) that ‘the most enchanting expression of a general state where theological man is balanced against natural man is Mozart’s Magic Flute’. A pattern drawn from The Magic Flute was in Tippett’s mind from the beginning of the generation of The Midsummer Marriage, and while he was convinced that ‘no-one now can match the innocence, tenderness and simplicity with which that mythological experience was presented’, the exemplar remained with him in fashioning this, his first opera: an opera which is a comedy, with a rather special version of what he saw as the one and only comic plot, the unexpected hindrances to an eventual marriage.
But does the plot of the intriguing and very beautiful opera that Tippett achieved really resemble that of The Magic Flute? How do the resemblances, such as they are, help us to understand The Midsummer Marriage?
In some respects, very obviously, the operas are alike. In both works there are two couples, one more spiritual, or called to higher things, than the other. In both operas, again, humans encounter some version of the supernatural, and in both, the other realm and its powers are expressed in symbols that do not belong to any orthodox religion. In The Magic Flute the machinery is masonic, vaguely Egyptian and at the limit sheer pantomime; the prince Tamino, its hero, is ‘japonisch’ – not so much Japanese (as William Mann has put it) as Ruritanian. The Midsummer Marriage is set in the modern world, has a priest and priestess in a Greek temple, and its Celtic hero and heroine undergo a Hindu transfiguration in the third act.
In both the operas, moreover, underlying the assorted symbols and doing something to unite them, is a meaning which the work tacitly claims as universal. For Mozart and his rather distracted librettist Schikaneder it was the message of Reason, Nature and Wisdom, the words that are inscribed on the three temples which Tamino encounters when he enters Sarastro’s realm. In Tippett’s text there is a symbolic structure with strong Jungian associations, expressed in the many binary oppositions that are invoked (between the sexes, for instance) and in the references to the four elements, the four seasons and the various beasts that all figure in the Ritual Dances.
Once one reaches these universal currents that flow through the two works, however, one begins to see that the resemblances between them may not go very deep. Tippett’s opera is in fact more involved than Mozart’s in the ‘supernatural’, in the sense at least of significances that transcend familiar human understandings. In his book Moving into Aquarius, Tippett refers several times to Stefan George’s line ‘ich fühle Luft von anderen Planeten’, ‘I feel the air from other planets’, and a powerful charge is given to The Midsummer Marriage by the sense that Mark and Jenifer are involved in, and the other characters are encountering, an order of things beyond ordinary calculation.
Mozart’s characters are certainly in a strange enough world, but it is notable how, under the level of the magic tricks, there is a robust commitment to the everyday powers of humanity and to a belief that human benevolence and practical good sense can prevail. There is a significant glimpse of this (in a particularly masonic form, perhaps) when Tamino, approaching the temples, remarks on their workmanship: ‘these columns prove that skill, art, industry reside here; where action rules and idleness is banished, vice cannot easily gain control’. These temples have been designed – they are the product of thought and work; they are not magical emanations or (like the temple of Tippett’s Ancients) unspecifically mysterious ruins. Indeed, the message of The Magic Flute is that this life, our life, can be made to embody the aspirations expressed in religion. The last words of Act I, repeated by the three boys at the beginning of the finale of Act II, express this in the noblest tones of the late eighteenth century: when virtue prevails, when peace fills the hearts of men, ‘dann ist die Erd ein Himmelreich, und Sterbliche den Göttern gleich’ – ‘the earth becomes a heavenly kingdom, and mortals are like gods’.
An unquestioned acceptance of such values unites Tamino and Pamina, as it eventually unites them both with the world of Sarastro. The relations of Mark and Jenifer in The Midsummer Marriage, and the relations of both of them to reason and truth, are more complex. Mark, first of all, is already, to some obscure extent, part of the supernatural world. He is ‘a young man of unknown parentage’, who has seen the Ancients ‘since boyhood’. He already knows the name of the dancer, Strephon. Yet it is Jenifer, in flight from her bullying father King Fisher, who is drawn to explore this world and precipitates the division of their paths that occurs in Act I. It is she who says, ‘It isn’t love I want, but truth’, and says it again when he responds only with the adoring, and also self-adoring, lyricism of ‘The summer morning dances in my heart’. She may seem to echo Pamina, who, asked by Papageno what they can say to Sarastro, in a phrase of famous beauty and confidence sings, ‘die Wahrheit’ – ‘the truth’. But the echo is a false one, and significantly so: in Pamina’s world there is no conflict between love and truth, and there is no conflict between her and her loved one (except for the moment when, later, she thinks he does not love her).
Jenifer, on the other hand, needs to ‘thrust her lover from her’ before she can marry him. She has first to make a journey which will free her from external attachments. Her departure has the effect of setting Mark off on his own journey, one that in the first instance sends him to a place of darkness and need, in order that (as I read it) he can separate his joy in Jenifer from his pleasure in himself. This progress does serve to separate him from his exultant ego, but at the same time it identifies him more urgently with physical desire, with the rhythms of ‘stallions stamping’ that the chorus of men take up from him in the Act I finale.
When Jenifer comes back, she also is detached from the ego, particularly from her aim of marrying in order to get away from her father; but in coming to this she has moved too far beyond the world of desire and has reached a state of spiritual purity and calm which leaves out physical need altogether. (King Fisher’s intervention at this point – ‘We live on earth and not in heaven, nor is there disgrace in that’ – is true and also entirely misses the point.) Now it is necessary that each of them should go in the other direction and accomplish the compensating change that will make each a whole person and their marriage a whole marriage.
That second departure occurs at the end of Act I. In Act II Mark and Jenifer do not appear at all, and it is only in the finale of the opera, after the fourth Ritual Dance, that they reappear, transfigured and united, in a Hindu hieratic pose. By now there is no further question of what in psychological terms has happened to them. The unity of each, and their uniting with each other, is displayed and not explained. It occurs as an outcome and a celebration, and not as part of the action.
After their first conflict, the action of The Midsummer Marriage, both dramatic and psychological, has in fact very little to do with Mark and Jenifer. What the chorus calls, at the end of Act I, ‘the perils of the royal way’ are not enacted for us. Almost everything that visibly happens does so to the more earthbound pair of Bella and Jack, and when they grow, as to some extent they do, it is in ways that are directly involved in the action.
They are not at any serious level parallel to Papageno and Papagena in The Magic Flute. It is only with respect to their future, their life after the opera is over, that we are invited to see them as similar, and Tippett’s suggestion of this is explicit in the passage in Act II where Bella and Jack look forward to the arrival of ‘a little Jack or a little Bella’. Though the setting of this 1950s suburban dream is very appealing, its content may seem dated now; more generally Bella and Jack, and King Fisher as well, share stereotyped assumptions about men’s and women’s roles, and it seems that this may be intended as a sign of their attachment to the everyday order of things, since with Mark and Jenifer it is not the same. In their world, contrasts are indeed drawn between male and female principles but they are seen as forces within one person, whichever their sex.
In fact we are shown in a brief but important moment in Act III that Jack and Bella themselves grow in these respects. When they crucially defy King Fisher and precipitate the climax of the action, they do so together, and it is Bella who takes the lead: ‘Ah, Jack! our moment’s at its height.’
This is their last appearance in the opera, and when they leave and the chorus sings for them, ‘He must leap and she must fall, when the bright sun shines on midsummer-day’, we have the sense that their life has already become a different order of enterprise than we would have gathered from their domestic dream and from all the earlier emphasis on his spanners and her hair-do.
Perhaps the most significant comparison between The Magic Flute and The Midsummer Marriage lies not so much in their plots or characters or symbolism as in their relations to the operatic tradition, in the kind of opera each is. Pierre Boulez has said about Parsifal, in his remarkable essay ‘Approaches to Parsifal’ (1970); reprinted in Orientations (London, 1986), that it was the culmination in its time of a tradition going back to Schütz and Monteverdi, a synthesis between the Passions and the Opera, between a representation that is abstract and imaginary and one that is concrete and theatrical. Though Boulez places The Magic Flute, naturally enough, among the concrete and theatrical, he has good reason to mention it in this connection: the role of the chorus and of Sarastro can be understood in terms of this tradition, not adding to the enacted events so much as placing them in a more comprehensive setting.
In these terms, The Midsummer Marriage is a very special kind of opera, one that constructs a space for itself not only between operatic drama and oratorio but between both of these and masque. In such a work it is particularly important that not everything that happens occurs in the succession of action: we are told a good deal more than the story. It is appropriate that a section which contains some of the work’s finest music, Sosostris’s scena in Act III, is in its content and tone much more than anything required in terms of the plot. At this point, it is as though the enacted events of the opera have become only a small part, the most immediately active part, of a larger whole, which is expressed in the orchestra and in a voice which is not that of a character but reaches beyond the characters.
If this is so, then it is also what makes possible a surprising musical effect: that at the noble climax of this solo – ‘You who consult me, should never doubt me. Clean let the heart be, of each seeker’ – we should hear as entirely appropriate an echo of Elgar. Among the many resources of English music on which Tippett draws, he can find a place – just because he is writing an opera which presents more than its story – for the voice of a composer whose great dramatic powers never found expression in opera.
Janácěk’s Modernism
Doing Less with More in Music and Philosophy This essay was written for a volume celebrating the seventieth birthday of the composer Alexander Goehr.
Milan Kundera has written, ‘I see the art of ellipses as crucial. It insists that we go directly to the heart of things. In that regard, I am reminded of the composer I’ve admired passionately since I was a child, Leosˇ Janácěk.’
Kundera emphasised particularly Janácěk’s methods of leaving out the ‘superfluous notes’: the transitions, the decorations, the bits that merely fill in. Hence his harsh juxtapositions and the bare repetitions. Kundera also said that Janácěk created a new world for opera, ‘a world of prose’; he was interested above all in the analogies to Janácěk’s music that he might create in the old world of prose, in his own writing.
Sandy Goehr and I have often talked about the demands of modernism – the case, above all and unsurprisingly, of the composer who still acknowledges those demands but does not necessarily interpret them in terms of a specific set of techniques, those of the Second Viennese School.
We have talked, too, about the analogies, such as they may be, between those aims in music and the aims of certain kinds of writing, in particular the kind of writing I myself do, which is philosophy. I do not recall Sandy’s saying very much about Janácěk, but when I saw these remarks of Kundera’s, quoted by Vanda Prochazka in his essay on Kát’a Kabanová in the Glyndebourne programme book (2002), they brought back vividly to me the concerns of those conversations.
There is no need to suppose that Janácěk’s operas are among the very greatest: there are others (though not many modern ones) that are more complex musically, dramatically and psychologically. In particular, the sacrifice of musical development carries a substantial cost. But in his finest works he found forms of expression that, for me at any rate, have a quite specially direct and disarming effect. He found at crucial moments an absolutely honest lyricism, not kitschy or contrived, which is an unquestionably convincing extension of the ‘prose’ that is carried by his constant attention to the rhythms of speech. The closing scene of the Vixen is one example, and another, particularly striking, case is in the last act of The Makropulos Case, when after a lot of argumentative exchanges Emilia Marty renounces the formula that keeps her alive: Janácěk very slightly opens out the material that up to then has been kept under tight control, and it is as though the roof has fallen in.
It is (of course) a matter of doing more with less – in contrast, to take an easy one, to the overloaded and (at least after Elektra) relentlessly ingrati-ating structures of Strauss. It was always a demand of modernism to do more with less, as it was to avoid at once the flabby and the kitschy. But those demands always bring a question with them: what more is done with less of what? That is still the question when one turns to the case of philosophy.
In some modernist philosophers there is an analogy to Janácěk’s ellipses, the elimination of transitions: with them, juxtaposition and repetition provide the structure. But it is not clear how well this can work, indeed how well it does work even in the greatest of such philosophers, Wittgenstein. The problem perhaps lies in this, that even if the loss of large-scale development in Janácěk is counted a loss, the result is unquestionably music, and very powerfully so; but philosophy without argumentative development, philosophy in which all the therefore’s have been replaced by and’s or by spaces, is dubiously philosophy at all. Or rather, if it is philosophy, as Wittgenstein’s quite certainly is, it is so because it is about earlier philosophy, even if it does not say so: in his case, the earlier philosophy was often his own. That other aspect of modernism, historical selfconsciousness, has to sustain the identity of the enterprise altogether.
This is not just a classificatory or organisational problem, as to what is to be labelled ‘philosophy’. It is a deeper question of philosophy’s claim on anyone’s attention. Janácěk’s music does not have to prove to anyone that it is worth someone’s attention – it commands it. But philosophers do not usually have much to make anyone interested in them except their arguments.
Modern philosophy has one sure modernist credential in its rejection of kitsch. In its technical complexity and a certain rhetoric of formalism it can rightly contrast itself with writing that cheaply passes as philosophy, with its false comforts or bogus profundities or self-satisfied and costless gestures of despair. Avoiding such things is not a particularly modern aim – it is something that philosophy has had to do from its earliest days in ancient Greece. There has been, rather, a characteristically modernist turn of the screw in an extended suspicion of what counts as hollow in these ways. But the basic modernist demand of doing more with less is not met simply by formalism and technicality and the rejection of the merely edifying. That can result merely in doing less with more: the ‘rattle of machinery’, as an old and bad-tempered colleague of mine in the University of London used to call it, takes over once more, and the only difference is that now the rattle is clearly that of machinery. What has to be done with less is – at the end of the line or, better, at the end of some lines – to speak truthfully to a real human concern, to something that could disturb or interest a grown-up person quite apart from any involvement in professional philosophy.
Of course no intellectual construction, in philosophy or in the arts, speaks to anyone in a way that is not mediated by some history and some set of expectations, and it is a mark of modernism not only to accept that fact but in certain ways to exploit it. Unselfconscious modernism is a contradiction in terms. It is an extraordinary achievement of Janácěk’s to have used a very original modernist technique to cut through its own peculiarities and to produce something that is experienced as an exceptionally direct address to very powerful feelings. A philosopher will understand, ruefully enough, that no philosophical words can ever do what music can do, in this as in many other respects. Yet Janácěk can stand as a reminder even to a philosopher of what should be done: granted essential technical complexity and inescapable selfconsciousness, to address, express and restructure real emotions in ways that neither evade them with formalism nor degrade them into kitsch.
Authenticity and Re-creation
Musicology, Performance and Production
Edited version of a lecture given to the International Musicological Society To love music, as I do – or rather, I should say, to love quite a lot of music, since there is a lot I do not know, some I am indifferent to, and some, as there is for any sensible person who cares about it, that I hate – this does not mean that even in an amateurish way one grasps much of the musicologist’s crafts. The converse, too, is at least conceivable – that mastery of the musicological crafts does not necessarily imply a love of music.
But when I try to imagine what this might be like, I find it is quite hard – partly because, if you have ever liked music, it is hard to imagine what it is to dislike it. But it is also because there is a difference in the musicologist’s case from all the others, that almost everybody who studies music can, to some degree and in some form or another, play it, and that gives immediate encouragement and hope.
This relation between the study and the performance of music parallels, of course, the original relation that exists in music between performance and creation. Music is virtually unique in this respect. For many arts, there is no performance. Where there is performance, the creator and the performer are rarely the same person, and where they are the same person (as they sometimes are in the theatre, for instance) the two roles are usually related in a merely extrinsic way. This may be so even in what may seem a quite favourable case, such as Noël Coward appearing in his own plays. With music, the relationship is, or at least has been, very much deeper than this. Not all composers, of course, are quite at Liszt’s end of the spec-trum, where composition can seem an overflow of performance. In the case of orchestral composition, there are many degrees of performance expertise that can underlie the ability to write for various instruments, from Elgar at one end to Berlioz, who, I understand, could not play many instruments very well, and in particular had not been taught the piano: as my French dictionary of music elegantly puts it, ‘ son père s’étant méfié du trop grand pouvoir qu’aurait pu exercer le piano sur l’enfant’.
There are, of course, the standard reactionary horror stories about contemporary composers who cannot play anything, including their own works – indeed, in the more extreme stories, cannot recognise their own works when played; but those stories are, as we know, typically told by cynical orchestral musicians or, just occasionally, by less successful conservative composers. But when all allowances and qualifications have been made, there has been a traditional connection between composing and playing, just as there is an intimate connection between performance and the mere existence of music.
If that is right, then perhaps we can take another step: the scholarship of music is intimately involved with the scholarship of the performance of music. I know that not all musicology is related even indirectly to performance or to the history of performance. Still, it must be important that there is a special relation to performance. This is why musicology even at its most austerely textual could not be just like textual criticism. Indeed, there are more problems about what textual criticism is in purely literary studies than textual critics have always been willing to admit, but whatever such a critic may be doing to the text of Propertius or – perhaps this is more immediately to the point – Sophocles, he or she is not preparing it for performance. Where words are concerned, the preparation of a text always underdetermines performance. Of course in the case of music a score also underdetermines performance, which is why there are interestingly different performances and interpretations, but the musicological preparation of a score always anticipates performance intellectually, if not in the practical sense that it has a particular performance in view. It is at any rate deeply involved in questions of performance style.
This is never so in the literary case. There can be cases in which historical research determines to an unusual degree what happens on a stage – I assume this is what is happening at the new Globe Theatre in London. But, first, the Globe effect, as we may call it, is incomplete – though I have not been there, I take it that the pronunciation is not usually authentically Elizabethan. Moreover, even the most enthusiastic supporters of the Globe recognise that this way of doing Shakespeare is one option among others.
No-one supposes that this type of performance – or a yet more authentically Elizabethanly pronounced version of it – is what it is to perform Henry V, that this is what Henry V is. Yet with some music at least, it does seem that the aim of historical scholarship is to establish what a given work is, in the sense of determining pretty closely what a performance would be that was a performance of this work.
Of course this does not apply to the scenic and other non-musical aspects of opera, and no-one expects it to do so. If one did aim at a performance of Beatrice di Tenda, for example, which was to the greatest possible degree determined by historical research, everyone would know that it was, like the Globe effect, a special option. I suggest that there is a real asymmetry here between music and literary works, even those, notably drama, that aim at performance. This corresponds to two different conceptions of authenticity. It inevitably follows from these differences that in the case of opera, where both the contrasting elements are involved, the two conceptions of authenticity converge on it, as one might say, from different directions.
It is a significant fact that we have seen in the opera house in recent years the coexistence of two kinds of radicalism: an increasing ‘authenticity’ of orchestral and vocal performance, based on historical research; and productions and sets that display all degrees of rethinking and creativity up to the now notorious extremes of directorial whimsy – which themselves are more or less what have come to be expected. In abstract terms, these two developments might seem to go in opposite directions. It is true, of course, that they can conflict, as when the production makes it impossible for the singers to express what the music requires or invites them to express. (This is not a conflict between music and drama: it is a conflict between the dramatic contribution of the music and the dramatic contribution of the stage.) But this is a matter of particular failures, not of what is intrinsic to the two kinds of radicalism.
Put together in the right way, quite extreme versions of the two kinds of radicalism can produce a triumphant success: a notable example has been Peter Sellars’s Glyndebourne production of Theodora. What is significant in this is that the two kinds of radicalism combine to the same end – an uncluttered, seemingly transparent enactment of what this particular work is.
I mentioned two conceptions of authenticity, roughly one appropriate to music and one to dramatic text: let us call them the authenticity of veracity and the authenticity of re-creation. Music drama requires, or at least can sustain, both, and in a successful example they come together. In the case of Theodora, the musical performance offers (or so I suppose) a closer approximation to what were, precisely, Handel’s means of expression. The production offers a version of what this drama, these emotional relations, can mean in terms that make sense to us, now. It finds visual and dramatic equivalences, which work for us, to the expressive content both of the words, and of the music as that music, partly with the help of musicological scholarship, is now presented to us. But no presentation of what happens on the stage that was itself determined by historical research could have a comparable effect, except, very occasionally, by luck.
In fact, the idea of a dramatic production, for instance of an opera, that was ‘authentic’ in the sense in which musical performances can aim to be ‘authentic’ (something we shall come back to) – that is to say, a production which aimed exclusively at the authenticity of veracity – seems to be virtually nonsensical. Critics nostalgically refer to what they call a ‘traditional’ production. But they cannot mean we should be given what Wagner in 1876 in Bayreuth actually had – for one thing, we know what Wagner thought of what he got in 1876. Could we say, what Wagner would have liked in 1876? That is an altogether indeterminate conception, above all in the case of this particular artist, since Wagner’s wants in this as in most other respects were grenzenlos (boundless). Moreover, since Wagner was not content with the resources he had, and since in any case the question is one for us, of what we should do, even the most devoted intentionalist has to ask, not what Wagner wanted granted the resources he had, but what he would have wanted if he had had our resources. What are ‘our resources’? That must mean, among other things, the resources we need to present his works to audiences who have seen what we have seen – and seen, not only on the stage. We are back, unsurprisingly, where we started, with the problems of staging Wagner’s works for us, now.
I have put this in terms of the artist’s desires or wishes, but I am not suggesting that such ideas are essential to the notion of authenticity. It is particularly tempting to move in this direction when pursuing such questions in the case of Wagner, just because he was an exceptionally devoted and prolix expositor of his own objectives. The point I am stressing is that even if one tries to think in terms of the composer’s desires and wishes, as one may be encouraged to do in this relatively favourable case, one still ends up where one started. It underlies the point that at least when one is dealing with the case of drama, there is simply no alternative to what I have called the authenticity of re-creation.
We reached that conclusion in this case by a process of what seems to me, at least, the merest common sense. However, once we have got there, we may reasonably wonder what is going to happen to the idea of authenticity more generally, in particular to the idea of the authenticity of veracity which I applied to musical performances. I have so far taken this idea for granted: as I put it in the case of Theodora, ‘the musical performance offers a closer approximation to what were, precisely, Handel’s means of expression’. This does not say ‘Handel’s intentions’. There is of course a large general subject here in the philosophy of the arts, one which must be of concern to the more philosophical parts of musicology. If the situation is anything like that in the philosophy of the other arts, the question is not so much whether the artist’s intentions matter to understanding the work, but rather what counts relevantly as an artistic intention. In the case of other arts, people who oppose the idea that understanding a work involves recovering the artist’s intentions often base their opposition on stupid ideas of what, in general, an intention is. They speak as though the intentional significance of an action, any action, is to be thought of as something written in a balloon coming out of the agent’s head, rather than figured in the action itself. (In much the same way, many post-structuralist rejections of the ‘authorial self ’ are directed against conceptions of the self that owe much more to Platonic or Cartesian philosophy than to any everyday workable conception of a person.)
The concerns of musicology, I take it, will not often be concentrated on external or anecdotal declarations of compositorial intentions, though they no doubt sometimes come into it. The question must rather be what the musical resources of a given time made possible, including what extensions of those resources were possible, and these are in the first place historical and interpretative questions. It must, I assume, be an aim of musicological scholarship to show us what artistic aims at a given time for a given composer or group of composers were even possible. This applies to the question of what expressive intentions, in the sense of musical intentions, were possible, but it must reach into other relevant questions as well. If, rather naïvely, we think of an authentic performance as a performance of a work which the composer would have recognised and approved as a performance of that work, it will matter what ideas the composer had or could have had of another performance of that very work – what idea, for instance, he might have had of a performance of that very work by different forces. What ideas may have been available at a given time and place I take to be a matter of history, one sort of history that musicologists do.
There are many related ideas that are equally the concern of such history: the notion, for instance, of what the composer can reasonably be thought to have wanted. This is not the notion of what as a matter of fact he expected, since he often had good reason to expect the worst, but what he would have wanted if he had known it was possible. The problems and indeterminacies lurking in this line of thought are obviously much better known to musicologists than to me, and I am not rash enough even to start asking about the exact differences there are between various cases, and what these differences mean for the notion of authenticity. There is the case of something that many eighteenth-century composers presumably wanted and rarely got, an orchestra which could play in tune; that is a case, certainly, where we are happy to give them some version of what they wanted. How far do we go from that before we get to the desire that some have ascribed to Beethoven in his later years, to have something more like a modern piano?
This is one range of problems that bears on what I called earlier the authenticity of veracity. There is another, and quite different problem – one that is even more general, and in fact ubiquitous. We who now hear musical works from the past have heard many things that the composer and the original audiences had not heard, and our expectations and ranges of comparison are quite different. This sets an a priori limit on the idea of authenticity. If you generated exactly the same sound waves as were brought about in seventeenth-century Mantua or eighteenth-century Leipzig, you would not make the same music, since no-one has seventeenth-or eighteenth-century ears. Everyone knows this, and it looks fatal to at least a naïve theory of the authenticity of veracity. Yet, curiously, this very general and seemingly fatal objection does not seem to matter much for the practice of music. It does not matter for the practice, I think, because every successful move in the ‘authentic’ direction itself helps to re-educate people’s ears. It does not re-educate them to what they would have been in earlier times, an idea which I take to be meaningless. Rather, they are re-educated so that they can hear these works for the first time. When performance decisions guided by ideals of authenticity are good decisions, as they often are, it is not because they make the music sound old but because they make it sound new.
I once heard a performance of the Bach B minor Mass given by the Freiburger Barockorchester and a choir associated with them (directed by Thomas Hengelbrock). I do not know exactly how ‘authentic’ it was. There was a small orchestra; a choir of about thirty; the soloists were part of the choir; there were male altos; some of the instruments were clearly more ‘original’ than others. It may be that, taken altogether, it bore a closer relation to something that took place (or perhaps took place) in 1749 than most performances in the meantime that have claimed to be of this work.
It was still a long way away from any such event in 1749: starting with the fact that it happened in the Kammermusiksaal of the Berlin Philharmonie, not much like the architectural, religious or social context of any event in 1749. What made it quite wonderful was certainly something that was a creation of 1997.
I think that what is suggested by such examples and by these lines of thought is that all authenticity is, in the end, the authenticity of re-creation, but that in the case of music – and, I suspect, uniquely in the case of music – there is a particular kind of re-creation that is specially guided by an ideal of authenticity as veracity. Musicological scholarship is essentially involved in that enterprise, though, obviously, some areas of it are further away from that enterprise than others. Some musicological research, I take it, is simply history which is directed to music, and it is like other kinds of history, though it needs a knowledge of music to do it: dating an autograph, finding out when Monteverdi went to Venice. But there will be no sharp lines to separate history and, eventually, re-creation.
There is the rich historical activity of establishing what expressive means were available, what significance particular means had in relation to others, what modes of decorum or propriety made sense, what violations of them were intelligible as expressive violations and not simply blunders.
Knowing these things helps us not only to understand, but to re-create, because they suggest ways in which we can construct analogues and correspondences to those means of expression, not by making the same sounds, but by making sounds which are indeed to an important degree like the sounds of an earlier time and which have a similar expressive significance for us – where the idea of ‘a similar significance’ is itself formed in the course of such enquiries.
Besides the problems of the authenticity of veracity, musicology is also inevitably involved in what is directly and immediately the authenticity of re-creation, the kind that is involved in performing dramatic texts. In the nature of the case, this applies in the first instance to opera, but it has wider implications as well. As I said in the case of Wagner, the problem is set by the fact that the works are being presented to people, namely us, who have seen many things that the composer and his original audience had not seen, and not only on the stage. It is analogous to the problems set by the fact that we have heard other music, but it is much more radical, and in this case, I have already suggested, there is no ideal of veracity to assist our re-creation.
The problem becomes still more radical when the issues raised are ethical, political and, in the broadest sense, ideological; and it is most radical of all when the works in question are both questionable in these respects and certainly not negligible – when, on the contrary, they disquietingly command our attention. So it is not surprising that, looking in this direction, we find ourselves once again confronting Wagner, and that the question of Wagner refuses to go away.
It is foolish to try to say anything briefly about this subject. However, the extreme and, in itself, untypical case of Wagner helps to make a point about the interrelation of musicology and the re-creation of music drama, a point that parallels, in a certain way, the point already made about scholarship and purely musical re-creation.
I take three points as given: (1) Wagner’s works are worth worrying about; (2) there is much that is ethically and politically disturbing about him; (3) there is some relation between (1) and (2), and merely appealing to a distinction between the man and the work will not, in this case, be enough (which is not to say that there are not other cases in which it would be enough). Much recent Wagner scholarship – or in the case of a lot of the writing about him – has tried to deal with these three points in an inadequate, external, way. Having catalogued Wagner’s more appalling attitudes, these writers try to find signs of them in the works, in the representations of Mime, Klingsor, Beckmesser or elsewhere. The present question is not whether these pieces of decipherment are correct. The point is that even if they are, they are too trivial for the writers’ own purpose.
These are people who accept (1); indeed, for most of them the works of Wagner are overwhelming, marvellous. This is why they have a problem.
But if that is true, then the existence of some tiny and disputable anti-Semitic signatures in the works is neither here nor there. These writers have externalised the problem, moving it from where it truly belongs: not accepting (3) at the right level, they are saying that there had better be something wrong with the works, and they have come up with a circum- scribed and relatively painless way of that being so. They are rather like someone who took Aschenbach’s problems, in Death in Venice, to be not Tadzio and his own feelings but the cholera.
There is an analogy to this in some of the disputable devices of production. Here, it is not that the comments are very small – on the contrary, the political comments are in many cases very pervasive. The analogy is that in many cases – by no means in all – they are external to the content of the work, and that they are indeed just comments. The mise-en-scène, in the worse cases, does not present the work, but acts as an ongoing subjoined ethical health warning.
A long time ago Thomas Mann had seen a lot deeper into all this. His famous lecture ‘The Sorrows and Grandeur of Richard Wagner’ is still the most helpful reflection that I know in relation to these questions, with the one significant qualification that neither here, nor (yet more remarkably) in pieces written during and after the Second World War, did Mann mention Wagner’s antiSemitism. His discussion is centred on the point I labelled (3) – that if there is something bad or ambivalent or suspect about Wagner, it is there in his work, and it is this that has to be understood. In discussing this fundamental point, Mann mentions many significant matters.
He stresses that Wagner’s work shares a German tradition, which has a long history, of the avoidance of or despair about the political. He also points to the fact that Wagner, like Ibsen, had a typically nineteenth-century concern with negotiating relations between psychology and myth, and that he was more successful with this in some places than in others (notably in Tristan Act III and in Parsifal). It is perhaps worth suggesting – Mann himself does not do so – that Wagner in these respects can be seen as an inverse of Ibsen. In works such as The Wild Duck Ibsen was able to give an almost Sophoclean strength and sense of necessity to what is on the outside an expressly bourgeois drama, while Wagner’s characters tend to have mythic clothes but a quintessentially nineteenth-century psychology.
Another of Mann’s points is that while the old criticism that Wagner’s music is not really musical was absurd, nevertheless it was not unintelligible: Wagner’s work does break down lines between the musical and the literary. As Mann, in a highly typical sentence, says about the E flat chord that starts Rheingold, ‘It was an acoustic concept: the concept of the beginning of all things. Music has been here pressed into service in an imperiously dilettante fashion in order to represent a mythical concept.’
Musicology is in a position to take such thoughts further, and indeed in much distinguished work on Wagner it has done so. I point to this set of questions for two reasons. First, it is an illustration of the power of musicology. The business of tracing the connections between all these thoughts – the history, the intellectual background, the traditions, and the style that Wagner evolved – calls on musicology in very many of its aspects; it demands a unity of cultural and musical understanding that makes the most rigorous demands on the subject. Second, such studies must potentially be in the service of production, for if we can understand more deeply and less anecdotally what these works are, we can understand better how to present them in ways that make sense of them to us.
However, part of the real ethical and political problem about Wagner is that we may never be able to reach the kind of position that Sellars achieved with Theodora. It may be that the total unity of psychology, myth and ethically redemptive significance to which Wagner aspired is an illusion, not just in the sense that it is unattainable – that is true of Beethoven’s ideals of freedom – but because, as Nietzsche said, it rests ultimately on a lie. If so, then no honest production can make it work. We can do it justice – but then it comes out guilty. Or it can come out less guilty – but then production will have negotiated this, as an accommodation between what Wagner believed and hoped to express, and what we can, now, decently and, as we say, in all honesty, accept.
I do not know whether this will ultimately prove to be so. But I suggest that it is a musicological problem in the broadest sense, and so illustrates how many things a musicological problem can be: one that calls on musical analysis, musical history, cultural history, political philosophy; and which, finally, demands an ethical clear-sightedness in recognising what we can honestly accept as saying something serious, which means – as of course it means – saying something serious to us now.
Naïve and Sentimental Opera Lovers
This essay was written for a volume by his friends celebrating Isaiah Berlin Isaiah Berlin used to maintain, particularly in his article ‘The “Naïveté” of Verdi’,1 that Verdi was the last great artist who was, in Schiller’s terms, ‘naïve’ rather than ‘sentimental’. He went on to mention, as he does in the article, formidable lists of artists who fall on one side or another of the distinction, Verdi finding himself with Homer, Shakespeare, Bach, Rubens, Pushkin and Dickens, while the sentimentalisch, in Schiller’s sense of the term, include, among many others, Euripides, Virgil, Ariosto, Dostoevsky, Flaubert and Wagner.
The distinction is one of selfconsciousness. ‘The poet is either himself nature: or he seeks her,’ Schiller said, and the idea is that the ‘naïve’ artist can take for granted certain unities – of thought and feeling, of man and nature – that the ‘sentimental’ has to seek as an ideal. Verdi, though a late example of the ‘naïve’, was for Isaiah Berlin a paradigm of it in all its aspects: ‘perhaps the last complete, self-fulfilled creator, absorbed in his art; at one with it; seeking to use it for no ulterior purpose, the god wholly concealed by his works . . . wholly, even grimly, impersonal, drily objective, at one with his music’. By contrast, the ‘sentimental’ spirit tries to make art a vehicle for something beyond itself, so that the political outlook of the artist, for instance, may become essential material for appreciating the work, as it is not in Verdi’s case, despite the involvement of his life with politics. Verdi does not want opera to be or do anything but what opera is and does; he lacks what Isaiah calls the ‘selfconscious, extra-musical, “sentimental” faith in music as a messianic rebirth of the spirit’.
As with all distinctions, there are other discriminations that this one does not help one to make. Intense artistic selfconsciousness and a sense of belatedness need not carry with them extra-artistic aspirations: the very idea of art for art’s sake, indeed, expresses the one in rejecting the other.
There are composers of opera who are paradigmatically ‘sentimental’ by all the other tests, but whose selfconsciousness is precisely engaged with the art itself, to the exclusion of those other aspirations: Berg is surely one, and Debussy another. But it does not matter that the ideas deployed in the distinction can be taken apart and arranged in different ways. What matters is how it is applied to Verdi, and in this, as in any other interesting applica-tion of it, the terms of the distinction are not formed simply by some abstract and general idea of the ‘sentimental’. Although he is not specifically picked out as doing so, there is surely a particular artist who embodies the half of the contrast, as Isaiah has expressed it, and represents Verdi’s spiritual and artistic opposite. Every mark of the ‘sentimental’ in Isaiah’s characterisation of it might have been expressly formulated to apply to Wagner, from obsessional selfconsciousness and the need to reinvent the means of expression, to the urge to issue manifestos and to achieve redemption through art; and the malaise of the nineteenth century from which, as Isaiah says, Verdi was remote was the condition of much of Wagner’s work.
The contrast between Verdi and Wagner is extreme, over-determined, and just for that reason it can serve as the occasion of many different discussions – about Italian and German culture, obviously (the contrast that was closest to Verdi’s own heart), or about different strains of Romanticism. I should like to use the contrast here as the focus of a more modest set of reflections, about what it is to be an opera lover. I am encouraged to think about the question by Isaiah’s love for opera.
Someone who has had the good fortune to go to many performances with him and to talk often about opera with him might reasonably think that his love for opera just was love for opera, in its purest and best form, and if you understand how he loved it, then you understand what it is for opera, as such, to command the sort of love it commands. This is, indeed, true. But the problem of Wagner leads (as that problem often does) to an interesting question, of the ways in which opera can command love. As the Marschallin says in one of the most sentimentalisch, as well as sentimental, of all operas, the ‘how’ makes all the difference.
The opera lover loves opera as a form of musical and dramatic art, and, from this, several things follow straight away. One is that the opera lover does not love only opera: in particular, he or she enjoys non-operatic music. People who like opera but not, otherwise, music are exposed to the interpretation that what they really like is going to the opera, a taste that can notoriously coexist with having no interest in operas at all. Again, the opera lover is not simply what is vulgarly called a ‘canary fancier’, someone who is interested in the talents and achievements of singers, but is as uninterested in what they sing as some of them are themselves. It is certainly possible to combine the two interests, and to take pleasure from collecting in one’s experience performances by certain artists, as others collect performances of rare operas.
Opera is one case in which love is almost entirely expressed in enjoyment. What you love, you straightforwardly enjoy; you look forward to a performance, or at least one that promises to be tolerably good, with pleasure. ‘ Rigoletto is the most enjoyable of operas,’ I have heard Isaiah say.
‘Perhaps not the greatest, but the most enjoyable’; and indeed, it is hard to imagine someone who was an opera lover, for whom opera was a special source of pleasure, who would not agree that Rigoletto yielded that kind of pleasure in a very concentrated and effective way. There are a few very basic ways of being held and excited by the operatic stage, and Verdi was a master of some of them: Rigoletto is unusual because the whole work is an example of those, as Figaro is of others. But it is significant that an honest opera lover, asked for examples of what is indisputably compelling as opera, would have to mention some pieces that are suspect in ways that nothing by Verdi or Mozart is: the trio in the last act of Rosenkavalier, for instance, or the end of the first act of Tosca, which, with its mounting excitement and the superimposition of a dark baritone declamation onto the rhythm of a tolling bell and religious ritual, is a splendid example of something that real opera lovers really love.
The fact that the powers of opera can be exercised, not just marginally but very typically, by distinctly dubious works, raises a question – a rather unnerving question, perhaps – about the character of opera altogether.
Puccini, in particular, despite his great and continuing popular success, has always met critical resistance, and this does not rest only on certain limitations of his range or his musical invention, but more basically on the feeling that there is something manipulative or even cynical about his works. The charge seems to me unanswerable. Yet it is still true that some parts of those works are able to hold us just as much as operas that have no such faults – and those parts are not necessarily less manipulative than other parts, but often more so. If opera is a serious business, how can this be? It is hard to think of a parallel to it in non-musical drama.
Indisputably, some great works of music are operas, but the true opera lover loves more operas than those. Is it true, perhaps, as some musicians suggest, that the passion of an ‘opera lover’ is not really an artistic taste at all, that it has something undiscriminating about it, that it is not too choosy about where it finds its pleasures? I was once (embarrassingly) introduced to Dietrich Fischer-Dieskau as ‘a great lover of opera’. ‘Ah,’ the distinguished artist replied, ‘I am not.’
I think that there is an explanation of why opera is peculiar in this way.
(It will not satisfy the most intransigently puritanical, but then it is hard for them to be opera lovers.) W. H. Auden’s remark that, in a sense, there can be no tragic opera, because singing itself too evidently seems a free and enjoyable activity, reminds us of something very important, that the enjoyment of opera, particularly Italian opera, is inextricably bound in with the enjoyment of a technique. It is not only song, and the fact that it is song, that generates excitement, but the singer. At a fine operatic performance, we are conscious of the singers’ achievement and of the presence of physical style and vitality; a feeling of performance and of the performers’ artistry is more constantly at the front of the mind than with other dramatic arts. It is because of this that outbreaks of applause (if not, these days, the granting of encores) may be appropriate, as they scarcely could be with a play, even one in verse. Yet opera is drama, and the sense of performance, as of musical intensity, reinforces the drama itself. In these respects, there are contrasts not only with non-musical drama, but, in the other direction, with the ballet, where the sense of performance and technique is indeed paramount, but which, in our culture at least, is less committed to being a dramatic art, and has closer relations with both the decorative and the athletic.
Opera, particularly in the Italian style, presents one immediately with musical artistry, and so, more generally, with an obvious artifice – conventions of musical and dramatic form that are not simply transparent, as blank verse may sometimes be, but constantly manifest. It is just because the pleasures of opera are bound up in this way with an artifice of which one remains conscious that Puccini, though a notoriously opportunistic artist, can offer compelling examples of its powers. In the second act of Tosca, for instance, Scarpia’s arrangement of his treachery gives pleasure through its theatricality, which is displayed in a way that could not be accepted without the music. It is not just a device that puts us into complicity with Scarpia against Tosca. It puts us into complicity with that device itself, with a certain tradition of theatrical effect, and what we enjoy is seeing the wheels of artifice turn.
The acknowledged display of artifice, Puccini’s most characteristic device, affects the experience of seeing one of his works with which one is familiar. Puccini carries further than any other opera composer the idea of securing an effect through the audience’s consciousness that that is what he is doing. In doing this, he is exploiting something that is inherent, to some extent, in opera and in the performance of opera, and that is why one can acknowledge the truth of his talent to the nature of opera.
You have to be far gone in sentimentality and hence in brutality not to find the torture scenes in Tosca and in Turandot disagreeable. I have known Isaiah Berlin to express his rejection of these scenes also by classing them with what he calls ‘music that operates directly on the nerves’, examples of which he finds equally in Elektra and Wozzeck and (perhaps more surprisingly) Peter Grimes.
The balance between the effective and the repulsive in Puccini is so delicate that one can see how someone who cared for opera might, despite his entirely operatic achievements, want nothing more to do with him. To have nothing more to do with Verdi, on the other hand, would be to have no more to do with opera. Wagner’s work, however, this always vexed case, raises issues of acceptance or rejection, attachment and hatred, which are of a totally different order. It also happens to be the subject of the most substantial disagreement between Isaiah’s taste in opera and my own. I have been for a long time deeply taken with these works: perhaps I am, mildly and certainly controllably, addicted. What I am not is a Wagnerian, in the sense of someone who is impressed by the pretentious ideology of the Gesamtkunstwerk (Wagner’s ‘music dramas’ are no more gesamt than other operas), or who thinks that if you take Wagner’s work seriously you must regard most other opera as trivial. The attitude that isolates the appreciation of Wagner in that way, if it still persists at all, is just a remnant of a cult that Wagner himself encouraged.
What certainly exists is the opposite view, which also isolates Wagner from the rest of opera, not for the Wagnerian reason that it is unworthy of him, but because he is thought to be unacceptable to it. There are, and I am sure there always will be, those who love music and love opera, but find Wagner anything from uninteresting to intolerable – boring, obsessional, assaulting, fraudulent. This rejection is not simply a misunderstanding or a limitation – though it takes no depth-analysis to detect that in its more passionate forms the rejection sometimes draws its passion from a fascination with Wagner’s achievement, or fear of it, or, as in Nietzsche’s case, both. The most frequent complaint, that Wagner is boring, can itself, in some of its expressions, attract the same suspicion: as the literary critic David Miller has said, ‘boredom, as the example of pornography perhaps best illustrates, overtakes not what is intrinsically dull, but what is “interesting” to excess. Far from the simple reflex-response to banality, boredom hysterically converts into yawning affectlessness what would otherwise be outright panic.’
Isaiah’s attitude to Wagner, though negative, was not of these kinds. It was notably cool, firmly rooted among the less passionate forms of rejection. He simply did not like these works. Admired, of course – who could not, in some way? Liked, no. At one time I thought that he did not like them just because he saw them as a prime case of music that acts directly on the nerves, but I decided that this was not all there was to it, partly because of his attitude to Parsifal. He invited my wife and myself to see a performance of it at Covent Garden. But having it in mind that the music of Amfortas, in particular, operates not just on the nerves but inside them, I did ask Isaiah whether it was not going to be very painful for him. ‘No worse than the others,’ he replied, and it was obvious, as the evening went by, that he meant it. Again, it was not mainly a matter, for him, of Wagner’s antiSemitism or what is supposed to be the suspect political character of some of the works. Isaiah (quite rightly, in my view) found the main cause for that sort of concern in Die Meistersinger, and for the most part left the issue there, being less eager than many critics of Wagner to see Mime, for instance, as a caricature from Der Stürmer.
I think that Isaiah’s response to Wagner was in some ways like Stravinsky’s:4 not at all the same in the extremity of hostility, and not the same in motivation, but resembling it in a kind of taste that excludes any Wagnerian enthusiasm. Stravinsky’s motivations, indeed, and the special colour they give to his hostility, could not be shared by anyone who was not a composer. The function of Stravinsky’s views of Wagner, as with most judgments by artists on artists, is not to render justice, whatever that might be, but to clear a space for his own methods and his own work. It can be a positive help in that task that the judgments should be downright eccentric. Stravinsky’s famous opinion that Il trovatore is a better work than Falstaff is barely tenable, but it is at any rate comprehensible. It is a lot weirder to see Falstaff as a work that might have been written by Wagner.
Stravinsky openly declares, in fact, his interest as a composer in resisting the Wagnerian impulse, which he equates with an absence of limit, an imminent and implicit disorder:
As for myself, I experience a sort of terror when, at the moment of setting to work and finding myself before the infinitude of possibilities that present themselves, I have the feeling that everything is permissible to me. If everything is permissible to me, the best and the worst; if nothing offers me any resistance, then any effort is inconceivable, and I cannot use anything as a basis, and consequently every undertaking becomes futile.
This is a problem for a creator, not for a (mere) listener, and no-one who does not share his responsibilities and his opportunities need share the judgment. It is possible to share the spirit of his taste, but that spirit is not captured in the formulae that Stravinsky offers when he is describing his own processes of creation. As a composer, Stravinsky says a lot about his own need for constraints, imposed limitations and obstacles. He expresses that need when he says, ‘The more art is controlled, limited, worked over, the more it is free.’ Taken out of the context of the autobiog-raphy of creation, offered as a canon of taste, the statement is absurd – the most crabbed academic exercise would satisfy the test of freedom. In another sense, the statement is of course true, inevitably true, but then it does not lead to a taste for one style rather than another: Siegfried is as controlled, limited, worked over, as The Rake’s Progress.
There is a taste to be shared, however, and I suspect that Isaiah, to some significant extent, shared it. It is a taste sympathetic to Nietzsche’s famous anti-Wagnerian remark about Carmen, that he liked the music of Bizet because it does not sweat. The taste despises larger spiritual or intellectual objectives (here the definition of the sentimentalisch reappears), so long at least as those are the ambitions of an individual rather than the resources of a tradition. It applauds a certain manifest formality, and a displayed desire to please through craft. It would be wrong, though, to say that it is a classical taste, if that is supposed to set it against the Romantic: in opera, it will find a great deal to admire in Weber, for instance, and in Bellini.
Much of what this taste enjoys in opera is Italian, but in its admiration of a certain unpretentious elegance and gaiety, it naturally welcomes many French works. While Isaiah would not, I believe, go to the remarkable lengths of comparing favourably with the works of Wagner, as Stravinsky did, a ‘sparkling group of masterpieces’ by Delibes, Chabrier and Messager, it is true that as he climbed the path to his house in Italy, what was coming through the headphones of his Walkman may well have been, if not some rarity of Rossini, then La Muette de Portici or Le Postillon de Longjumeau.
It would be wrong to think of this as a taste for good taste. Rather, this view of things defines more than one kind of bad taste. One kind is either naïve, like Verdi’s, or wilfully assertive, like Mahler’s, and both can be entirely creative. The other, however, is the uncontrolled and revealing dissolution of the ‘higher’ into the banal, and this is variously comical, upsetting or repellent. No-one can sensibly deny that Wagner is liable to this kind of disaster. It happens in the truly dreadful march and chorus of the knights in Parsifal; and James Joyce had a point, I am afraid, when he remarked of Siegmund’s much-admired love song in the first act of Die Walküre, ‘Winterstürme wichen dem Wonnemond’ (‘Winter storms give way to the moon of joy’), ‘Can you imagine this old German hero offering his girl a box of chocolates?’
There can be no such disasters in Verdi, because his style is always in touch with popular forms, and even with Aida, a comparatively late work which uses many sophisticated devices, it is simply not a relevant complaint that the triumphal march could be a large-scale offering by the Busseto town band. It is inherent to Wagner’s enterprise, on the other hand, that he should run these risks. For the same reason, he can elicit, at his most effective, a more extreme response. The sense of the limitless, which Stravinsky mentioned in describing his relations as a composer to Wagner’s work, is certainly involved in the emotional reactions that it can produce. Feelings of being drowned, ecstatic or immeasurably elated have been mentioned by Wagner’s audiences from the earliest performances on: above all, of course, in the case of Tristan. There are probably not many people now who would want to find in these experiences the religious or revelatory significance that was once claimed for them by Wagnerians, whose rhetoric of transfiguration has done almost as much to put off the sceptical as the earlier cult of Bayreuth did (to which the less devotional admirer of Wagner might have applied the remark made by Monsignor Ronald Knox when asked why he never went to Rome, that if you are feeling queasy on a ship, the worst place to go is the engine room).
Whatever is to be made of them, the peculiar effects of Wagner’s music, when it works at full power, are undeniable: everyone who cares for it will know what I am talking about. I remember in particular some performances of the Ring in English at the English National Opera in the 1970s. It did not always work, but on some evenings, when Reginald Goodall’s patiently synoptic vision took hold, and Alberto Remedios showed what it is to be that very rare thing, a truly lyrical Heldentenor, all the limitations disappeared, the creaking space-age scenery seemed to dissolve into light, and it was as if there were no tomorrow. There was a performance, too, at Covent Garden by Jon Vickers as Tristan, one of several that he gave at that time, which was extraordinary. While still sustaining the heroic tone, he peculiarly conveyed the sense from the beginning that this was a doomed man who partly understood that he was on the way to disaster. When Tristan confronts Isolde for the first time, near the end of Act I, he greets her with the words ‘Begehrt, Herrin, was Ihr wünscht’ (‘Command, my lady, what you desire’); and as Vickers sang ‘Herrin,’ a descending fifth, his voice took on a hollow tone of acceptance that seemed to prefigure everything, immediately reducing me and others to a virtually uncontrollable state which lasted the rest of the act and most of the evening.
It has often been said that no-one but Wagner, at least among opera composers, can cause such extreme responses. In my own experience, it is certainly true. But then one may ask, ingenuously: why should they? This is one, special, form of artistic power; and like all great artistic capacities, there are other very valuable ones that it excludes. It would be an error, perhaps a symptom of real addiction, to suppose that the satisfaction offered by Wagner is one that transcends any other offered by music, and that all opera aspires to the special kind of power that he achieves. No-one thinks any comparable thing with respect to the other arts. But equally, it is a question why this power, as opposed to those exercised by other composers, should be so distrusted and resented. Indeed, there is an earlier question, of how this power can even figure in the thoughts of those who reject Wagner: if one does not feel it, how does one know what is supposed to be objectionable? For some people, no doubt, the answer is that they do feel it, and that is why they reject it. For others, it may be that they do not feel it, but they do feel, and resentfully, that something extreme is being demanded of them. For most, perhaps, and especially those who are coolly unimpressed, the answer may be that without the kind of involvement that leads, occasionally, to those extreme responses, the works appear to lack interest in a particularly annoying way: they seem not works of music, but only causes, vehicles, a pharmacopoeia of emotion.
If it were true that Wagner’s works lacked musical interest, then it would help to explain why they appear so differently to those who are moved by them and those who are not. But it is not true. It has indeed been said that Wagner wrote ‘music for the unmusical’, and the intention of the comment, I take it, is that he solved the problems of organising these vast works by principles of dramatic and psychological association rather than in terms of musical form. The leitmotif, above all, is thought to be a less than musical device. There are certainly passages that invite the jokes of Stravinsky, Milhaud and others, where the effect of the motives is indeed like that of a skilfully assembled slide show. But in general, it cannot be right to oppose dramatic and psychological associations to musical procedures in Wagner. His aim was to achieve the associations through the procedures, and it is hard to see how the opening of Act III of Siegfried, for instance, charged as it is with the drama, could be thought to fail as a musical achievement, or not to make musical sense.
If the objection is that the musical procedures are dramatically motivated, then this just comes to saying that this is not pure music: indeed, it is opera. In just this way, in his integration of dramatic and psychological processes with musical procedures, Wagner’s achievements are essentially operatic, and that is one reason why those who appreciate him see their appreciation as continuous with their reactions to other opera they admire. Equally, a lot of what excites them is what excites them in other operas – such basic operatic materials as silence or crescendo, or a generous melodic gesture.
Yet there is also a way in which Wagner’s art is not typically operatic, and is even an antithesis to that of other operatic composers. He himself said, ‘my art is the art of transition’, and some of his greatest strengths lie in the capacity, not only to move easily between motives or keys, but to get from one texture or mood or dramatic context to another. A fine example of it is the invention with which, in Act II of Die Walküre, he negotiates a particularly difficult change from the testy domestic quarrel, in which Fricka defeats Wotan, to the following scene in which Wotan lays his world-historical concerns before Brünnhilde: Fricka’s victory is marked by a beautiful and unexpected passage (‘Deiner ew’gen Gattin heilige Ehre’; ‘The sacred honour of your eternal wife’) which in a few bars rounds off the first scene and sets the tone for the next.
It is essential to this skill that it conceals itself, that you are conscious of the result rather than of the procedure. Rather similarly, at another level, though great artistry is needed to sing Wagnerian opera well (or, indeed, at all), that artistry is not typically on display – it is deployed in producing, within the conventions of the style, a dramatic voice, which conveys a response or reveals a state of mind. One is conscious, indeed, of physical presence and power (this is a basic excitement that is shared by the experience of Wagnerian operas and others), but vocal artistry as such is less to the fore. The only work of Wagner’s in which vocal skill and musical ingenuity repeatedly draw attention to themselves is Die Meistersinger, and that is for the special reason that the relation of skill to expression is the subject of the opera – to that extent it is about itself. Wagner is thus the opposite of Puccini, as I earlier described him. The performer’s skills, and the composer’s, do not stand at the front of the audience’s consciousness, and it is not through manifest artifice that he achieves his effects. Yet manifest artifice of that kind is indeed typical of opera, and just as Puccini’s exploitation of it brings his melodramas close to the heartland of opera, so Wagner’s refusal of it sets his masterpieces apart from that heartland.
It must be in terms of some such account, I think, of the similarities and the equally notable differences between the experience of Wagner’s operas and that of others, that we should explain the striking asymmetry of taste among people who otherwise share an attachment to opera: those who appreciate both Wagner and other styles of opera find a lot in common between them, while other people find it hard to see how an enthusiasm for opera extends to Wagner at all. Certainly, there is something to explain, and most of the existing explanations, such as they are, are too contemptuous of one party or the other: the disagreement is not one that invites contempt.
But if these, or something like them, are the differences, where are we left with the distinction between the ‘naïve’ and the ‘sentimental’? There was never any suggestion that the ‘naïve’ excluded the conventional – on the contrary. In the article from which I started, Isaiah reported the fact that certain progressive Russian composers of the time resented Verdi’s work, just because he had succeeded in bringing new life to the dreaded ‘formula’, the stale conventions of the Italian tradition. There is no puzzle in the ‘naïve’ artist using very conventional means, and the ‘sentimental’ artist using less conventional means. But what about the operatic audience? They are by the nature of opera conscious of those conventional means, and enjoy them as such. The nature of that consciousness, however, changes over time. Verdi’s means are not available now to a popular composer, or to any other, and even if his characters are represented as embodying universal human passions, the conventions of that representation appear to us, now, not just as conventions, but as those particular conventions; just as we also have to allow for some nineteenth-century sentiments about fathers, virgins, respectable sisters and so forth.
We may easily accept the conventions, but our sense of them, and our enjoyment, cannot avoid the further turn of historical selfconsciousness that all this implies. We can enjoy the ‘naïve’ artist, but only as ‘sentimental’ listeners.
With Wagner, on the other hand, though some of his concerns belong clearly to the nineteenth century, much of his complexity, perversity and ambiguity is familiar in our world, as is the idea of works as extreme as his.
His musical style, because it did so much to form not just the art music of the twentieth century, but (for instance) film music, is close in some ways to what is familiar outside the opera house. Because of their difficulty, their history and the huge problems of mounting them, his works are only now really meeting the audiences he himself wanted for them: through such productions as those at English National Opera, and, on an immeasurably greater scale, through TV broadcasts of Chéreau’s Ring, for instance, they are seen by people who are neither devotees nor experienced opera-goers, and who approach them, not of course without preconceptions, but without the preconceptions of those who love other operas and their artifices. To many people now, despite and because of his oblique devices, Wagner may seem to speak more directly than other opera does. It is the ‘sentimental’ artist who has the ‘naïve’ public.
Notes 1. ‘The “Naïveté” of Verdi’, Hudson Review, 21 (1968), pp. 138–47; reprinted from Atti del I Congresso internazionale di studi verdiani, 1966 (Parma, 1969); reprinted in About the House, 3:1 (March 1969), pp. 8–13.
2. Hudson Review, pp. 140–1, 143.
3. D. A. Miller, The Novel and the Police (Berkeley and London, 1988), p. 145. He is actually discussing a markedly different case: Trollope.
4. As expressed in Poetics of Music (the Charles Eliot Norton Lectures 1939–40), trans.
Arthur Knodell and Ingolf Dahl (Cambridge, Mass., 1970). I have no reason to think that Isaiah’s views were actually influenced by Stravinsky: it is only a matter of resemblances.
5. Poetics of Music, p. 61; the quotation in the next paragraph comes from p. 63.
6. Ellmann, James Joyce, revised edn (Oxford, 1983), p. 460.
