Mozart’s Comedies and the Sense of an Ending
It is not easy to bring a serious dramatic comedy to its end. A well-written farce ends itself – the last combination of pieces is reached, the accelera-tion gets to its limit, the play stops. But a comedy may well face a problem raised by its own depth. It may have expressed or suggested feelings of considerable intensity, and embodied them in happenings which are at any rate unusual; at the same time it is related to, and belongs to, a normal world. The plot has its shape, which is closed when the play ends, but one must be allowed to believe that the characters go on. In farce, at the end the characters are folded up and put away. In tragedy, characteristically, when it is finished, it is all finished: if the characters continue at all, they do not continue into anything – it was another tragedy that provided Oedipus the King with a future, and with an eventual end of his own. In comedy, the characters live, and also live on.
The end should not anticipate the future too insistently, or the shape of the work is lost, and the time of its closing can seem arbitrary, like closing time. Comedy may bring to bear on its closing moments recollection, a felt condensation, of what has happened; those moments are also a beginning, but one which is different from others in virtue of what has just happened.
A particular sense of that is given by Shakespeare, whose comedies end often in the melancholy of departures, of the characters going in different directions.
The resources of music do not necessarily make the problems of meeting these demands any easier for an operatic comedy. The mere fact that its end is the end of a musical piece, and the normal expectation that such a work will end with an extremely positive and emphatic coda, has the effect of closing the opera from succeeding time. Since in opera the life of the characters is in the music, the invitation, essential to comedy, to imagine a continuation of their lives can be frustrated by the impossibility (or at any rate the inappropriateness) of imagining some more music.
In two, at least, of his three great Italian comedies, Mozart presented himself with these difficulties in a particularly acute form; and even the subtlety and boldness that he brought to them have not left their endings beyond question. In Don Giovanni and Così fan tutte, the end has often been seen as the problem. However, if there is a problem, in each case, that cannot be the full extent of it – it must reach back into understanding the work as a whole.
It is significant that there is no comparable question with Die Zauberflöte. If there are problems about that opera, they have nothing to do with the way in which it ends: a static celebratory chorus of praise and thanksgiving is an entirely proper end to that drama, if that is what it is.
There is a revealing contrast in this with Fidelio, which similarly ends with music rather than in it, but which leaves one with the strong impression that the emotional structure embodied in the music is shaped differently from the drama, and indeed lasts longer than the drama does.
In Mozart’s Italian comedies, there is no question of that. The dramatic significance of each of these works extends to its end, and the ultimate finale displays that same expression of dramatic development through complex musical forms which Mozart exploits throughout these works, especially in the finales of earlier acts (including, in the case of Don Giovanni, the extra finale which actually occurs, on the plan eventually adopted, in the middle of the second act).
The Romantic taste which saw Don Giovanni himself as a Faustian or Promethean figure defying the cosmic order notoriously found the final fugato sextet of the opera unnecessary, and limiting to the heroic drama.
The sextet is in truth, as all modern productions acknowledge, absolutely essential, as defining – in a sense – a ‘return to normal’, something which itself helps to define the meaning of previous events and of Giovanni himself. In fact, the characters, with the exception of Zerlina and Masetto, scarcely do ‘return to normal’, but rather try to stick something together from what is left now that Giovanni is gone. In particular, they are not simply operating in a space left for virtue now that vice has been punished. Life without Giovanni will be life that has lost a very powerful and single-minded embodiment of qualities which are indeed human, even though he himself lacked several important aspects of humanity.
The closing bars have to define the boundary between the extraordinary events of the drama, including the extraordinary figure of Giovanni himself, and the world of everyone else, and it is fundamental that they define it in a way which does not exclude him from what makes ordinary life worth living. Giovanni’s own end and the end of the opera both affirm that there is no actual human life that can be lived as unconditionally as his, but, at the same time, they recognise that any vitality that other people have must sustain the dream of being as free from conditions as his was.
Don Giovanni might be said to draw the boundary between the extraordinary and the ordinary as a line between nature and convention. But it is not any arbitrary convention that constitutes the ordinary, but the general idea of convention that is necessary to human nature, and which provides a possible human life. In Così fan tutte, however, the end seems to represent a return to convention of a much shallower kind, which involves rejecting a developing and ‘natural’ sentiment, that of the girls for their substitute lovers, which we have been led by Mozart to take seriously in a series of effective and increasingly expressive pieces, culminating in the beautiful and distressing episode of ‘Fra gli amplessi’. After we have been led, very carefully, through all this, and the desires and demands presented in it have been acknowledged, everyone is briskly, indeed brutally, returned to a conventional arrangement which was grounded, as we were equally carefully shown, in shallower sentiments.
Some critics – perhaps most of those who have seen that Così is a deeper and stranger work than it seems, and that there is a problem about how to read it – have seen its ending as a failure, as the point at which the lack of fit cannot be concealed between what Da Ponte wrote and what Mozart made of it. On this view, the end was originally intended to represent a return from fancy or unreason or extravagance to reason and reality, but it does not work, either because Mozart did not see it that way, or because we, two hundred years later, cannot see it that way and can understand it only as a cruel return from reality and freedom to convention and domination. It would follow that it is a work flawed either by its creators or by time, and, either way, the end of it does not acceptably draw the line between what happens in the opera and the world of ordinary relations.
On another view, no-one has made a mistake, and the affirmation that convention is reality and that deeper sentiment will be overruled is exactly what the work means. Its bitterness will then be considerable, and it will be compressed into the end – compressed, indeed, into the fact of the end, since there is little material in the closing bars actually to express it. Peter Hall has almost brought off this conception of Così in his Glyndebourne production, in which the characters at the end look like the stunned occupants of a wedding photograph.
Così, as it now seems to us, does leave indeterminate exactly what boundary is being drawn at its end, and what exactly counts, after all this, as the normal and as the irregular. That, on any showing, leaves some problem about the end, a problem which perhaps ultimately dissolves in the recognition that the feeling of discomfort with which we are left by the ambiguities of this work is itself entirely appropriate to its subject.
Even the end of Figaro may be thought to raise a difficulty, though its existence, so far as I know, was first suggested by a critic who does not regard it as a difficulty at all, but as a perfection. Joseph Kerman has written of the beautiful Andante chorus of forgiveness which holds the action still before the very last moments that ‘the reconciliation of the Count and Countess is deep and true, the most beautiful thing in the opera’, and that this looks forward to Die Zauberflöte and to the heights of consciousness appropriate to a noble hero and heroine. If this is what this music had to mean, then there would be a problem, since that is not true of the Count and Countess, and we cannot be required at the very last moment of the drama suddenly to believe it. Nothing has basically changed with the Count and the Countess, nor, even at this instant, are they very close together: they may be seeing more than usual, but they are doing so apart.
The day’s doings have probably left the Countess’s loneliness very much where it was. Our straightforward reaction to the opera, that it is in Figaro and Susanna that some larger and more spontaneous humanity triumphs, is surely right.
The Act IV finale of Figaro is indeed perfect, and that passage is essential to it. What is important is the calm, the moment of complete understanding, between what has happened and what we are allowed to believe will yet happen. It centres on the Count and Countess, and could not centre on anyone else, but there is no problem in the fact that we cannot believe in their permanent reconciliation, because insofar as the passage looks backwards and forwards, it is not simply about them. It rather brings the whole range of feeling of the ‘folle journée’ into a momen-tary condensation, before everyone moves on into the next and more ordinary day. At the end of Figaro, the difficult task of marking a boundary between the shape of a comedy and the world to which it belongs is solved at a deeper level and with more perfect assurance than in any other opera.
Mozart’s Figaro
A Question of Class?
About ten weeks after the first performance of The Marriage of Figaro in 1786, a Vienna paper carried this paragraph: ‘What is not allowed to be said these days is sung, one may say, with Figaro – this piece, which was prohibited in Paris and not allowed to be performed here as a comedy, either in a bad or in a good translation, we have at last had the felicity to see represented as an opera. It will be seen that we are doing better than the French.’ That paragraph suggests only that on the musical stage Mozart and Da Ponte could get away with things not permitted to Beaumarchais’ original play; but it is not far from that to the idea that the opera is actually more innocuous than the play, and avoided scandal by avoiding being scandalous. A few years later, in fact, a Berlin paper could say that it was Mozart’s music alone that could make this ‘capon-ised’ Figaro tolerable, ‘so much has he suffered from the mutilation’.
Right from the beginning there has been a conception, one still widely held, that Beaumarchais wrote a politically radical play which Da Ponte and Mozart turned, indeed, into a masterpiece, but a masterpiece of sentiment, sensuality and individual character, devoid of political or socially critical content. For some this is a pity, for many more it is not; but for both it is a fact.
But is it a fact? This is the question I want to look at. The truth, even about Beaumarchais, is more complicated than the usual story makes out.
Beaumarchais certainly had his problems with the censors and with Louis XVI himself, who first said that the piece would never be played; but after some successful intrigue by Beaumarchais, which attracted useful publicity for the play, it was put on with vast success at the Comédie-Française in April 1784 and continued to play to delighted houses. ‘They have laughed at their own expense,’ said the Baronne d’Oberkirch of the aristocratic audience, ‘and what is worse, have made others laugh. They will regret it, later on.’ But even if the Baronne was right about the eventual effect, it was not, in fact, the distinctively political content of the play that had caused its troubles, or caused trouble to its German translation later in Vienna. The objection to the play was not primarily that it was subversive, but that it was indecent; it was seen as licentious, with regard to such things as the Countess’s relations with Cherubino – an element, incidentally, later to be admired by French critics as among the most original in the piece.
Beaumarchais’ reputation as a subversive writer increased with hind-sight, and in the 1860s Alexandre Dumas fils could overexcitedly describe him, on the strength of The Marriage of Figaro, as a ‘revolutionary writer’.
But the play was not so perceived at the time, and it is not easy to find all that much explicit comment in it to invite the description. There are some remarks about politicians and the administration of justice; and Figaro’s monologue in the last act includes sour jokes about the privileges of rank and the workings of censorship; but even in that case, which is sometimes thought the prime example of the change from social resentment in the play to purely individual feeling in the opera, even there the differences can easily be exaggerated – Beaumarchais, too, uses as his guiding thread sexual jealousy. The main difference is rather that Beaumarchais’ Figaro (in whose autobiographical ramblings Sainte-Beuve detected a touch of the club bore) never comes near the depths of hurt and bitterness that Mozart uncovered in the recitative ‘Tutto è disposto’ , and the snaking unsettled aria which follows it. But is radical comment necessarily a matter of explicit political and social remarks? Beaumarchais, after all, represents a social order in which rank and its powers enter into and form the relations, above all the sexual relations, of these people, in ways which we are invited to deplore, just as we are invited to rejoice in, not merely be amused by, the Count’s discomfiture.
It is no accident, relative to all that, that he is a count: this too, and perhaps more deeply, is social comment. But all that is equally true of what is given us by Da Ponte and Mozart; and in that sense, that too, perhaps more deeply still, can be seen as social comment. It is a mistake to oppose on the one hand the relations of social status and power between these characters, and on the other their personal and sexual relations: to a notable extent, the personal here implies and is built round the social.
That this can be so is after all a commonplace of European literature and drama; that it has been very little applied in writing about Mozart is perhaps just another indication of the fact that there has been very little serious opera criticism, and indeed very little belief that there could be such a thing.
It is perhaps an effect of Peter Hall’s experience of non-operatic drama that his marvellously well judged Glyndebourne production of Figaro succeeds in setting out concretely, clear-headedly and convincingly the complex nature of these relations.
Of course, it is one thing to show, as Mozart clearly does show, the inter-penetration of social power and sexual relations; another thing to offer a social critique; still another to offer a revolutionary critique. To what extent Figaro can be read as critique of any kind is a question I shall come back to at the end. First, we should look at what the opera does, above all what it shows us about the relations of the four chief characters. We should start with the Count, the formal holder of power: while it is the plans of the other characters that largely structure the drama, it is the Count’s projects, entirely, which occasion it. In Beaumarchais’ play, it is said of the Count that he is a libertine from boredom, and jealous from vanity. Da Ponte only partly agrees, as we see in the brief recitative conversation between Susanna and the Countess at the beginning of Act II. Here, the Count is said to be like all modern husbands, unfaithful by design, and jealous from pride. This infidelity is different from that of Beaumarchais’
Count, who is motivated above all by boredom, a boredom which is partly formed by his way of life, and is also, as he and the Countess individually tell us, the product of her tireless, but equally tiring, devotion to him. He is exhausted by her exceptional tenderness. Da Ponte’s Count is also bored with the Countess, but he is specially labelled as a modern man who has a system: and it is appropriate that, having forsworn the droit de seigneur, his feudal rights, the Count should approach Susanna, as she tells us here, with that more modern device – a contract for money. What is clear here, in any case, is the contrast between what he could offer to Susanna, however much he wanted her, and what he used to offer the Countess; the Countess used to receive something called ‘love’, and no-one in Susanna’s station can expect that from the Count. That certainly is a matter of class; and more so, in a way, in the opera than it is in Beaumarchais. For, in the play, that social thought has got attached to it a further and, as it were, compensating piece of cynicism, to the effect that the absence of love is after all only the absence of an illusion: as the Count says to Susanna in a marvellous epigram which Da Ponte does not match – love is only the fiction of the heart, it is pleasure which is its history.
Thus it is the lower classes who, as the objects of pleasure and not of love, can, in a way, represent reality. That idea is certainly, in that form, far removed from Mozart. Yet there is another version of that idea, a much less cynical version, which Mozart perhaps expresses, too. It can be heard most clearly in the contrast between the Countess’s ‘Porgi, amor’ at the beginning of Act II and Susanna’s ‘Deh vieni, non tardar’ in Act IV. The Countess’s song expresses an abstract ideal; Susanna’s expresses concrete present desire.
As for the Count, his frustration and his social contempt unite in his famous third-act outburst, ‘Vedrò mentr’io sospiro’, which is obsessed with the idea that the woman he desires should go to his servant:‘un vile oggetto’, as he calls Figaro, a worthless object. Here, very plainly, sexual frustration and social affront combine in one unbearable assault on the self. The real cause of his anger, in fact, is the sheer and simple frustration of his will: it is power, rather than in the end desire, the baffling of which has led him to this extreme. In this, he is typically and totally the social master: it is not the content of his desires, but the mere fact of their existence, which constitutes for him their authority.
In this, Figaro stands in total contrast to the Count. The mere existence of obstacles to his projects does not elicit violence or frustration from him: it elicits cunning and action. He does not start out with the idea that the world will be responsive to his will. He starts out rather with the characteristic hope of the underprivileged, that, with luck, the will can find a hole or two in an unresponsive world. There is only one place at which real frustration, powerless bitterness, breaks out, in that same last-act jealousy aria: and it is all-important that it occurs, not because plans to his end are frustrated, but because the end itself seems to have vanished, when he thinks that he has lost Susanna, the sole purpose of all his resourcefulness.
So long as his objective is there, Figaro is not to be put down by the fact that it takes a long way round to reach it: he would expect no less. His attitude is expressed quite wonderfully in the first-act aria ‘Se vuol ballare’, and in the delicate recitative which precedes it. When, in that, the orchestra has brushed in with the lightest of strokes the implications of Susanna’s being the secret attachée of the Count, Figaro says firmly, ‘non sarà’, it shall not be. With the Count, those words would be a command; with Figaro, they are a decision to act.
‘Se vuol ballare’, memorably, comes back when, in Act II, after some complex conspiracy between Figaro, Susanna and a distinctly nervous Countess, Figaro reminds them, and above all the Countess, that it is his plans that are in hand. In Peter Hall’s production, there is at this point a wonderful and revealing moment, when the Countess looks at Susanna and the departing Figaro suddenly aghast, realising that she has put herself into their power. It is an anticipation of something which the Countess herself will express in grander terms later, when in Act III, in the recitative to the nostalgic aria ‘Dove sono’, she expresses her shame and humiliation, not merely at the infidelity of her husband, but at the fact that that infidelity reduces her to seeking the help of her maid.
The Countess, though evidently a sympathetic character, which the Count barely is, nevertheless shares something with him which neither shares with the others: straightforwardly, rank, but as a result of rank, a certain unconquerable loneliness, which all the conspiracies and dressings-up and plots shared with valets or pages will not, even in her own mind, overcome. By comparison with the Countess, Susanna is a vastly freer figure. She could not marry the Count (and who but the Countess would want to?), but she has the power conferred by the fact that he wants her; her sex and her station together make her freer than anyone, freer indeed than Figaro himself, for she, Susanna, alone of the four, has some natural basis of relations with each of the others, unlike Figaro, who confronts the Count in rivalry, and the Countess with an unresolvable ambiguity about their relations. When, near the end of the last act, Figaro pretends to be making love to the Countess, it only makes sense because we know it is actually Susanna; what a real love scene between Figaro and the Countess would be like is quite unimaginable, while a real love scene between Susanna and the Count is something which we, and they, would know the nature of perfectly well.
The Countess is most alone; the Count, selfish though he is, relates in a way to Figaro and Susanna through power and rivalry and desire, but the Countess is left with not much except her memories, her fractured pride, and her mildly light-headed excitement with the unfocused sensuality of Cherubino. Or is she left also with hope? Here something turns on one’s interpretation of the very end of the opera, above all of the deeply beautiful Andante chorus of forgiveness which breathtakingly holds the action utterly still before the very last moments of the bustling conclusion.
The critic Joseph Kerman has seen in this passage an anticipation of The Magic Flute, not only musically, but in the celebration of the superior love of a superior couple: ‘The reconciliation of the Count and Countess,’ he writes, ‘is deep and true, the most beautiful thing in the opera.’ He sees in them a noble couple capable at their best of heights of consciousness not available to the Papageno-Papagena level of Figaro and Susanna.
This view seems to me quite false to Figaro: it is an arch example, moreover, of a basic error in the appreciation of Mozart’s operas, the idea that the relations of pairs of characters are parallel in different works, whereas in fact they are quite different and have to be understood, without prejudice, in each case. In that Andante, there is indeed a moment of calm, of attainment, and of complete understanding; but it does not, to me, imply that anything has basically changed for the Count and the Countess, or that even at this instant they are very close together: they are seeing more than usual, but they are doing so apart. The day’s doings have probably left the Countess’s loneliness very much where it was. Our straightforward reaction to the opera, that it is in Figaro and Susanna that some larger and more spontaneous humanity has triumphed, is surely right.
What then of the question of a social critique which I mentioned earlier?
I hope the question, put in those terms, has by now lost some of its edge. If what is meant is a revolutionary critique, in the sense of one that shows the necessity, in order to cure human evils, of social or political action, then there is none of that in this work. But if what is meant by a social critique is a work which not merely displays human feelings and relations in a real social context, but shows those feelings as formed and distorted by that context, and shows also how rank can itself generate rage and loneliness, while lack of it can leave room for a greater openness, then Figaro is, among many other things, such a critique. It is not an inappropriate thing for one of the very greatest masterpieces of realistic art to be.
Passion and Cynicism
Remarks on Così fan tutte
To take Così fan tutte seriously is not, as people sometimes impatiently insist, to refuse to treat it as a comedy. On the contrary, it is to take it seriously as a comedy, something we are certainly prepared to do with other comedies, and with Mozart’s other great Italian operas. Since one is dealing with an opera, that involves attending at once to the music and to the meaning of the action, and when one does that a problem certainly arises. I want to try to locate the problem, and explore one approach to dealing with it.
The problem arises from the undeniable presence of passion in the seductions of the second act. There is passion, though not very demandingly so, in Dorabella’s sweet yielding to Guglielmo; it is overwhelmingly present in the very painful moments of the duet ‘Fra gli amplessi’, in which Fiordiligi tries to get away from Ferrando and is unanswerably prevented. Yet after these encounters which the music presents as emotionally real, and after the couples move on to a marriage which, although fake and contrived by the conspirators, nevertheless is heralded in music once more of real power, especially in the canon quartet ‘E nel tuo, nel mio bicchiero’ – after all that, the disguises are taken off, and everybody is hustled back to the person who is conventionally the right person and all ends in good cheer and the praise of reason. Something, it might be felt, is unsatisfactory in that ending.
Nearly every critic who has taken Così seriously has found something unsatisfactory about it. Beethoven disapproved of the plot, but then he disapproved of Figaro and Don Giovanni as well, and the point is therefore less interesting, since it is in comparison to them, rather than to Fidelio, that one first wants to look at Così. Wagner indeed did make that comparison, and thought that an unworthy subject had produced lesser music: ‘How doubly dear and above all honour is Mozart to me,’ he wrote, ‘that it was not possible for him to invent music for . . . Così fan tutte like that of Figaro! How shamefully would it have desecrated music!’
But that is not right; the upsetting feature of Così is not that this subject has elicited weak music, but that some of the music it has elicited is, so it seems, too strong, and puts a weight on the plot which its farcical artificiality cannot sustain. I do not believe that if Da Ponte’s libretto had been set in a rattling bright superficial way by someone else it would ever have upset anyone. A Così by Rossini might have been trivial or boring, cynical indeed in an undemanding way, but certainly not upsetting. The problem is not merely that the libretto is cynical or silly or disagreeable about women. The problem is rather the emotional power which Mozart has vested in that artificial narrative structure, and cumulatively so through the second act until almost the end.
Since the great revival of interest in the work in the twentieth century, some critics have suggested that the problem was just the product of nineteenth-century moralistic limitations, and that if we take a sufficiently complex or ironical view of it, the work will be distanced enough to remove any discomfort. Richard Strauss referred to what he called ‘the humorously pathetic and parodistically sentimental . . . delicate irony of Così fan tutte’: this wheezy accumulation of epithets only emphasises the central difficulty – that if the music which Mozart gives Fiordiligi’s situation in the second act is a parody, then we have no reason to trust our emotional reactions to anything in Mozart’s music at all. Edward Dent, again, grasped desperately at both horns of the dilemma, and said that the characters in Così were marionettes capable of an amazingly wide range of emotions3 – a description which makes the work sound, if anything, like Petrushka.
Most recently, the doubts have come round again. In Opera as Drama Joseph Kerman refers to Così as ‘Mozart’s most problematic opera’, and writes, ‘Romantic critics considered [the story] outrageous, improbable, immoral, frivolous, unworthy of Mozart; the last two charges are true enough.’ He argues that Da Ponte presented Mozart with a libretto unsuit-able to his genius, so that an unhappy strain developed between the formal frivolities of the story and the feeling which Mozart could not hold back from his music.4 Michael Tanner, in a radio talk, developed a particular version of such criticism, making the point that if we accept the invitation of the music to take seriously the feelings of Fiordiligi, the work reaches down to levels at which the behaviour of the men must be seen as both disagreeable and implausible.
In these criticisms we hear again the note of upset. The complaint is not merely that the work is in some formal or purely architectural terms awry, a technical failure; it is rather that the strain which develops between the text and the music generates something which is not just imperfect but unacceptable.
I agree with these critics that the later music is to be taken as seriously as it seems to demand. I also think that it is more than probable, historically, that Da Ponte produced one sort of thing and got from the hands of Mozart another, a very peculiar, sort of thing. It is also an upsetting thing.
But it is upsetting not because it is a failure, or broken-backed, or the product of a misunderstanding, but because it succeeds in being upsetting, and because the irony it undoubtedly contains is not of the kind which the libretto, taken in itself, would seem to expect, but something much more bitter. It is not a perfect work (if one wants perfection in Mozart’s comedies, it is to be found in Figaro) , but it is a deep and unsettling masterpiece, which, like some other eighteenth-century works, plays disquietingly across the formalities of its structure. Above all, to see it as it is, we have to recognise that it is less like its two great companions, indeed less like anything else, than we tend to assume.
The Romantic critics were correct in a feeling that the work is in a sense cynical, but quite wrong about what that sense is. It may be that the libretto is, as Kerman says, ‘firmly posited on the view that emotion is essentially trivial’ (an opinion which he rather quaintly calls ‘a legitimate comic exaggeration’), but, as Kerman also says, that is certainly not the view of Mozart, nor of Così taken as a whole. Its cynicism does not consist in saying that that is so. Nor does it really say that women in particular have light and silly emotions, as the title and motto formally suggest; if Così – taking it all the time as Mozart’s Così, not just Da Ponte’s – says anything special about women’s feelings, it is that they are more serious than men’s. What its cynicism consists in is rather the idea that emotions are indeed deep, indeed based in reality, but the world will go on as though they were not, and the social order, which looks to things other than those emotional forces, will win out. ‘Will’ win out, not ‘must’: the reach of the work is not wide enough, and the ambivalence of its end too great, to invite any universal suggestion. ‘Look,’ it rather says, ‘this is very often how it is, that real forces of emotion and desire are met and acknowledged and carry the most serious conviction, yet the world rattles on as though it were not so; the conventional order makes its bleakly reasonable demands.’
If this is the major theme, then certain other things fall into place. For instance, there is no reason why the men should be very strongly individuated characters. It has been offered as a reproach to the work that they are not, and indeed the criticism has been extended to the sisters as well.
In the case of the sisters, the criticism is just a mistake. They do start together, in Act I, in a public and social domain where there is not much to distinguish them, and where the stylistic variations in their conventional attitudes appropriately provide little leverage for character. But in Act II, as they move out into a world of genuine feeling, they are progressively separated, until Fiordiligi, who of course travels much further, reaches an entirely different place by herself.
The men’s role, however, is quite different, and it is a misunderstanding to suppose, as many critics and productions do, that the basic units of the opera are the male-female couples. It is also a misunderstanding to think that we have to take each major character seriously as a person if we are to take the work seriously. This is not a work like Figaro, whose depth indeed consists in the depth of its individual characters. The men in Così represent in their disguise more a common sensual threat, their role as Albanians a light-heartedly exotic emblem of strong passions and pleasures. This aspect is wonderfully brought out by Mozart when we hear the men for the first time in Act II, in the luxurious serenade ‘Secondate, aurette amiche’ which they offer from a barge at the seashore. This has very much the same tone as a piece in the first act, the shimmering trio ‘Soave sia il vento’, which Don Alfonso and the two sisters sing after the men’s supposed departure: already at that early moment – the earliest possible moment – we can hear something of the reserves of desire which are going to engulf these ladies’ conventional commitments.
The impersonality of the men’s sensual role extends beyond their joint efforts. It is almost equally impersonally that Ferrando plays his role as seducer of Fiordiligi: he is an embodiment of desire, a representative of a sort of force she has never had to face before. This element of abstraction from any concrete character gives a particular poignancy to that duet when Fiordiligi falls, which I have already mentioned, and of which Kerman rightly says that it is both the expressive and the dramatic centre of the work. Fiordiligi is pathetically planning to head for the wars, to join her proper man and escape these new feelings; the moment that she is interrupted by Ferrando’s vocal entry on the line ‘Ed intanto di dolore’, we and she know that she is done for, and the effect is more unnerving because that pure tenor voice seems to arrive from nowhere.
There is a similarly seductive relation of those two voices in the canon before the supposed wedding celebration, when first Fiordiligi, then Ferrando and then Dorabella join in a toast which significantly says, ‘E non resti più memoria del passato ai nostri cor’ (‘And let no memory of the past remain in our hearts’). The other man, Guglielmo, takes no part in this toast: his contribution to the quartet is confined to muttering curses against the women. There is a technical reason why he does not join in the canon, that it is too high for him; but in so building the quartet in the first place, Mozart surely found in the tenor voice, particularly after that earlier crucial duet, the right expression of the rapt involvement in which the women find themselves caught.
There is one place in which Guglielmo certainly branches out on a line of his own, and that, illuminatingly, is one of the weakest pieces in the opera: the diatribe against women, ‘Donne mie, la fate a tanti’. The thin-ness of this aria is particularly striking when it is compared with its great predecessor in the same line of business, Figaro’s aria ‘Aprite un po’ quegl’occhi’, which it resembles in many respects, except that it lacks the musical and dramatic power, and the remarkable bitterness, of that extraordinary piece. Perhaps it was just a mistake for Mozart and Da Ponte to try to repeat an effect. I suspect, though, that the mistake goes deeper: that it was wrong to try to equip Guglielmo for a moment or two with the features of personal bitterness at all. That is not the sort of thing he and Ferrando are there to express. If we regard the work as an éducation senti-mentale of the men, their growing up as individual persons to worldly wisdom with the help of Don Alfonso, then the piece is a failure; for one thing, at the end they seem not to have learnt much at all. But that is not the purpose, and there is no such failure. The men represent conventional suitors in one role, and the forces of desire in the other, and there is not all that much individual difference between them: Ferrando’s demands, in his second role, go deeper, just because they are demands on Fiordiligi, who is more deeply affected.
There is not much bitterness represented in the characters of Così at all.
Insofar as there is, it is largely concentrated in the few independent utter-ances of Don Alfonso, which sometimes have just the kind of disagreeable edge that Guglielmo’s aria lacks; as in his serpentine contribution at the very beginning of the opera,‘È la fede delle femmine’,5 and in his motto piece just before the Act II finale. Alfonso is the proper repository of sourness inside Così, since he is the authorised representative of the conventional world.
But the real bitterness lies rather in what we see and feel happen to the characters; in the way in which these women meet these desires and demands, and in the case at least of one of them, discover a deep response to them; and are then briskly, indeed brutally, returned to a conventional arrangement which was grounded, as we were shown, in shallower sentiments. Nothing is denied of what has happened; that is what is sad in this comedy, that all that dimension of feeling exists, but the world will rumble on as though it did not. Perhaps it may even be hinted that it is better that the world and its arrangements turn their back on that kind and depth of feeling. If one feels that Mozart in this work agreed that it was better so, then one may be able to hear the ambivalent end of the second act as a convinced, if rather wry, celebration of a return from danger. If on the other hand one finds, as I do, that the end makes a rather stunned and hollow sound, one may feel that this work is more concerned to display the demands of the world against feeling than it is to justify them.
Notes 1. Opera and Drama, in Wagner on Music and Drama, selected by Albert Goldman and Evert Sprinchorn from translations by H. Ashton Ellis (London, 1970), p. 100.
2. Quoted in János Leibner, Mozart on the Stage (London, 1972), p. 219.
3. Mozart’s Operas, 2nd edn (Oxford, 1991), p. 192.
4. Opera as Drama (New York, 1956), pp. 109ff.
5. The text carries a joke of its own: it is copied, all but one word, from a well-known aria text by Metastasio; see P. J. Smith, The Tenth Muse (London, 1971), p. 175.
Tristan and Time
The action of Tristan und Isolde does not lie in external events. In this work Wagner carried to the extreme the process that was always basic to his dramatic method, of internalising the action and making the music expressive of inner states and of the deepest movements of the mind. In order to do that, he not only drastically pruned the traditional legend of persons and happenings, but also, in a way that was totally original, adjusted the time of his drama – both in its tempo, and in the order in which it reveals its images and explanations – to the flow of its characters’ emotions, motivations and self-understanding.
The external events of Tristan are concentrated into very short episodes which occur at or near the end of each act. This helps to set up a parallelism of structure between the acts, which extends to other features as well. Thus each act starts with music off-stage, which provides the basis for at least the opening musical development. The dramatic content of that music, moreover, establishes in each act a different relation to time. In the first act, it is to the future; in the second, to the present; while in the third act it is, in an ultimate and revelatory way, to the past. These temporal references powerfully shape each act, and also combine to give the work, for all its apparent slowness and its emotional density, its sense of irresistible movement.
The sailor’s song at the beginning, drifting down from high on the mast, looks forward,
Frisch weht der Wind der Heimat zu (Fresh blows the breeze towards the home country) and the progress of the act is marked by reminders that the ship is rapidly approaching Cornwall, an arrival which Isolde knows she cannot endure.
The constant sense of that approaching future helps to hold the act together.
Within this forward-looking structure, Isolde turns to the past. In the long passage usually called‘Isolde’s narration’ she tells how she had earlier spared Tristan’s life, and how he had then come back to lead her off to marry someone else. This retrospection is so placed within the forward movement of the act that it cannot possibly give the sense of being an expository device: it is not merely (as it is in some of Verdi’s operas, for instance) that some things have to be told rather than shown because there is no time to show everything. These events are expressed in this way because Isolde carries them within her, and we have the sense, not so much of being told about the past, as of looking within her, and seeing, above all, one image: Von seinem Lager blickt’ er her – nicht auf das Schwert, nicht auf die Hand – er sah mir in die Augen.
(From his bed he looked up – not at the Sword, not at the hand – he looked into my eyes.)
Tristan’s feelings, by contrast, are understood here as they appear to others, and insofar as he expresses them himself, they are expressed negatively: in gloom, appeals to convention, excuses, silence and, finally, a willingness that she should kill him. He will consciously recover his past in passages in the following acts, most poignantly during the third act monologue.
The hunting horns with which the second act begins relate to the present and to what, they pretend, is happening elsewhere. They already tell us, and Brangäne’s repeated warnings remind us, of something that Tristan’s and Isolde’s music denies, that they are surrounded at that very time by an actual world of social and personal relations, some true, some dishonest – to which Mark’s long recriminations give expression.
Those recriminations, characteristically of Wagner, include a complex psychological account of the relations of the three people but, by that very fact, they are barely relevant to the state that Tristan and Isolde have reached.
That state is one in which they seek to escape altogether from the present, the passage of time and the world.
O sink hernieder
Nacht der Liebe (O descend, night of love) the love duet begins, gib Vergessen dass ich lebe, . . .
lose von der Welt mich los (give forgetfulness that I may live, . . . let me leave the world behind) and before that there has already emerged a dominant image of the whole work, the contrast of healing dark with deceitful and damaging light, and with it the idea that the final consummation of love must lie in night, forgetfulness, death, and escape from the illusions and pain which are associated with day. Just as the signal for the lovers’ meeting is the extinguishing of the light, so Tristan says that the love potion, when he drank it believing that it would lead to death, unlocked for him das Wunderreich der Nacht (the magical realm of night)
That dream of merging into non-existence, of never waking again, of dying while living for love, seeks to break out of time and individuality; but we are not allowed to forget, or only for a short while in the second act, that it is expressed in the midst of a real present and of real people elsewhere, a reality which it denies but which, with the most physically assaulting of all discords, finally breaks into it.
In a famous letter to Liszt, Wagner wrote of his plans for Tristan, ‘Since I have never enjoyed in life the true happiness of love, I shall raise a monument to this most beautiful of all dreams, in which from beginning to end this love shall for once be completely fulfilled.’ But, whatever dream is fulfilled in Tristan, it surely is not that of the true happiness of love – in any terms, at least, on which that could be enjoyed in life, or one could even dream that it might be enjoyed in life. Tristan is indeed true to another thought that Wagner expressed (to Cosima, in relation to Siegfried’s fear): ‘The kiss of love is the first intimation of death: the cessation of individuality’. But neither Tristan’s love, nor his death, can attain its proper significance just by his passing from the one to the other – by his falling on Melot’s sword and dying then and there. He has to pass through knowledge, and that is the subject of the last act.
In the third act, we have Tristan without Isolde, and it becomes finally his drama. In the first act, she was more conscious and active than he, but here he is the protagonist, he creates the inner conditions of his death, and she can only bless their love and follow him. Tristan’s great monologue, the true climax of the whole work, falls into two spans, the first ending in the delusion that Isolde has arrived, and the second in the reality of that arrival. When he regains consciousness at the beginning of the act, he has returned from the borders of death, from being indeed and for a long time im weiten Reich der Weltennacht (in the broad realm of the world’s night) and he is forced back to the hated world of light, its destructive power now concentrated in the glare of the sun. At the beginning of the monologue, again at its quiet centre, and throughout central to its musical structure is the sad tune of the shepherd’s pipe, ‘die alte Weise’ (‘the old song’), and it is this that in the second part of the monologue leads Tristan back to the past. He goes deep into memory; to his orphaned childhood, to his earliest and recurrent longings, to his healing by Isolde, and to the potion. At the climax, he becomes fully conscious of their passion and its suffering, and takes full responsibility for that suffering: Den furchtbaren Trank! . . .
ich selbst – ich selbst, ich hab’ ihn gebraüt.
(That terrible drink! . . . I myself – I myself, I brewed it!)
When Tristan dies, it is not merely by the ebbing of individuality into darkness, as at the beginning of the act he had wished, but in a state of ecstasy which has been reached by his acknowledging the roots of his suffering in himself.
Critics have tried in more than one way to describe the sense of release, enlightenment, indeed of achievement, that is finally brought about by the end of Tristan, some (notably Nietzsche) seeing it as tragedy, others as a symbol of mystical experience. Certainly it reaches further and deeper than a particular Romantic association of death, sexual love and the loss of identity, central as that undoubtedly is to the imagery of the love music. But in whatever direction one may further explore these meanings, it is certain that the significance of Tristan’s last transformation lies in the fact that it is precipitated through recollection, and by a return to his past. That is the final achievement in this work of Wagner’s mastery of the perspectives of time.
L’Envers des destinées
Remarks on Debussy’s Pelléas et Mélisande
When Debussy’s Pelléas was first performed, on 30 April 1902, the public reaction on the whole was one of disappointment. It was felt, at first, even by some of the more advanced critics; there was a feeling that the work was too thin, too shapeless, too indefinite. Rimsky-Korsakov voiced a wide-spread view when he said that the ‘harmonic combinations were incomprehensible, the orchestra lacked body and firmness of texture, the whole was monotonous; and he could see no future for this “curious experiment”’.1 As many writers have said subsequently, the reactions of that first audience have to be understood in the light of their Wagnerian expectations. Admittedly, a deeper insight into those harmonic combinations, original as they were, would have seen how firmly they were rooted in the experiments of Parsifal: Debussy’s great struggles to leave Wagner behind had led, harmonically, to radical development and change rather than to rejection. But in terms of melody and of dramatic conception, the rejection was thoroughgoing, and his textures deliberately moved away from what he called ‘Wagner’s American opulence’.
‘I do not feel tempted to imitate what I admire in Wagner,’ he wrote; ‘my conception of dramatic art is different. According to mine, music begins where speech fails. Music is intended to convey the inexpressible . . . I would have her always discreet.’3 ‘I hate the leitmotiv,’ he is reported to have said, ‘not only when it is abused, but even when it is used with taste and discernment. Do you think that in composition the same emotion can be expressed twice? In that case, either one has not reflected, or it is simply an effect of laziness. I should like to see the creation – I, myself, will achieve it – of a kind of music free from themes and motives, or formed on a single continuous theme, which nothing interrupts and which never returns on itself.’4 The crucial remark in this is, I think, the one about the same emotion not being expressed twice: while there are, as critics have eagerly pointed out, certain motives, of a fleeting kind, in Pelléas, they never label, nor even more tactfully serve to take us back, to remind us of anything: they genuinely form at each occurrence a new emotional compound.
‘I would have music discreet’: some have felt that discretion has too strong a hold on Pelléas – and some, in performance, have made it so.
Some have found it possible to appreciate the wonderful rhythmic subtlety of the accompaniment, the extreme refinement of the scoring, and yet feel that too high a price has been paid for this, in terms of dynamic energy.
The point was inimitably put by Richard Strauss, whose reactions to this effete Gallic production were vividly set down by Romain Rolland: Strauss said, ‘C’est très fin, très . . . (he gestures with his fingers) très gekünstet; mais ce n’est jamais spontané; cela manque de Schwung’ (‘It’s very subtle, very . . . very artful, but it’s never spontaneous: it has no oomph’)5 – a remark, incidentally, notably expressive of that sophisticated vulgarity which was to become the hallmark of Strauss’s own art.
But the objections went beyond a decadent overrefinement of style. The work was called enervating, invertebrate, morbid, pernicious: ‘Existing as it does with the minimum of vitality,’ one critic wrote, ‘it tends to impair and destroy our existence. The germs it contains are . . . of decadence and death.’6 Here we have a reading of the style – a profoundly wrong one, in my view – which is conditioned by an equally wrong reading of the dramatic content. Profoundly wrong: the power of Pelléas lies not just in mysteriousness or delicacy, but in a great humanity. It offers a representation of its characters’ inner life which is uniquely subtle in opera, and it does not do that in order to express an enfeebled excess of sensibility.
Rather it offers a certain picture, a strong picture, of what in the inner life is most alive, and of what in the way of tenderness and imagination is needed to keep it alive.
But to see how Pelléas does that, we first have to get out of the way a view of the work which indeed represents it as enervating – and, by influencing production, can make it seem so. This is the view that the work is all about inescapable fate and that the characters are all passive victims; a view which in its best-known form places the work in the world of Edgar Allan Poe. Both Maeterlinck and Debussy followed Baudelaire in being strongly impressed by Poe. Edward Lockspeiser has gone so far as to say that ‘the underlying inspiration of Pelléas, both the drama of Maeterlinck and the opera of Debussy, derived from Edgar Allan Poe and in particular The Fall of the House of Usher’.7 Now Debussy was certainly, throughout his life, fascinated by that tale. Before Pelléas, in 1890, he is said to have been writing a symphonic work based on the story. Later, the project of making it into an opera occupied him, on and off, from 1908 to the end of his life; and he produced two versions of a libretto for it. He is reported as having said that Poe ‘had the most original fantasy among the literature of all lands; he found a note absolutely new and different’.8 Something in that ‘sense of mystery and the passion for the beyond’ which Maeterlinck felt he got from Poe may have helped to attract Debussy so instantly to the drama when it was first performed in Paris in 1893; though also, no doubt, he had a sense that it was exactly what he needed for his conception of opera, that it was in a certain sense incomplete, that the play was, as Mallarmé said of it, an opera without music.9 But it seems to me strained, in relation to Debussy at least, to see as Lockspeiser does the old castle in the kingdom of Allemonde (‘all the world’) as Usher’s decrepit residence; and downright perverse to see Pelléas, the eager Pelléas who wraps himself in Mélisande’s hair, the child, as Golaud (though only with half-perception) calls him – to see him as ‘pale and feeble and overcome by destiny’ . . . a reflection of Usher, the quintessential man of an overrefined civilization’. There are indeed one or two traces in the libretto of Poe’s fascination with the charms of approaching death. Pelléas’s father, we are told, said Pelléas had the grave and friendly face of those who will not live for long; and famously, Pelléas says to Mélisande, ‘you are strangely beautiful when I kiss you so; you are so beautiful one would think that you were going to die’. Though worthy of an honourable place in a Vincent Price movie, those lines are not near the heart of what Pelléas is about.
The theme of overwhelming fate, or an inert belief in the hopelessness of all action, is not the point. Debussy implied a more vigorous view when he said, once more in the context of explaining his rejection of Bayreuth, that what he wanted for libretti were ‘poems that will provide me with changing scenes, varied as regards place and atmosphere, in which the characters will not argue, but live their lives and work out their destinies’.
There is emphasis in the story of Pelléas on the imperfection of action, because of the characters’ lack of understanding of it; but it is to trivialise this, and to lose its tragic quality, if one reduces it to a blank, external and preordained fate. One is specially overimpressed by the theme of fate if one places the centre of the play’s truth in the character of Arkel: who belongs, Debussy said, ‘to the world beyond the grave, and is full of the disinterested and far-seeing affection of those who are about to pass away’.11 But impressive, resigned and exceedingly ancient though he is, he is not omniscient, nor should we take him as the measure of all the action, rather than as an important contrastive element in it. ‘At my age,’ he says, ‘perhaps the surest fruit of my life, I have acquired a certain faith that one can rely on events’ – ‘je ne sais quelle foi à la fidélité des événements’: a vaguely reassuring phrase which, like his earlier thought that there may be no utterly useless happenings, in fact gives us no insight into the events of the opera at all, but is rather itself shown up, ironically, as quite inadequate to them. Confronted with the scene of intense brutality in which Golaud throws Mélisande about by the hair, and then, suddenly and hysterically quiet, says, ‘I shall leave it to chance’, Arkel offers the one thought, ‘if I were God, I should have pity on the hearts of men’. We are not compelled to regard this as a very deep comment on what has happened; in fact it is probably as well to admit the plain truth, that it is utterly idiotic.
But there is one of Arkel’s sage observations which comes nearer to the heart of this work: when he says, and it is practically the very first thing he says, that we see only the back of destiny, even of our own: ‘nous ne voyons jamais que l’envers des destinées, l’envers même de la nôtre’: the reverse side, as a piece of tapestry or other cloth has a reverse, or wrong side. So we do see something, but what we see is the wrong way round, and also fragmentary, gaining a sense only from a different point of view. So we can only imperfectly understand what we or others do; and there is a problem indeed, faced with the reverse side, not just of knowing what the pattern is, but of knowing whether what we take to be parts of a pattern really do contribute to a pattern at all – whether there is anything, in a given area, which responds to our guesses or questions. There is a problem about which questions may have answers, and which have no answers at all.
What the opera tells us is that to many of the questions that we are driven by our fears to ask about ourselves and others, there are no answers; and that it is essential to the life of the feelings to recognise that fact.
Mélisande, famously, is surrounded by unanswered questions, from her first appearance. And when she gives answers, they often fail to meet the questions that were meant. ‘Has someone hurt you?’ asks Golaud, at their first meeting; ‘Yes, yes, yes’ – ‘Who?’ – ‘Everyone.’ – ‘What did they do? – ‘I will not say, I cannot say.’ – ‘Where did you come from?’ – ‘I ran away.’
Further questions, equally unanswered, are suggested to us, as by the crown which has fallen into the water, the crown which ‘he’ gave her – who? These questions without answers do not serve merely to generate a sense of vague mysteriousness: they provide, further, the thought that if there are answers, they could not explain or have anything usefully to do with things as they now are. But beyond that there is a further sense, that certain questions have no answers at all – that they are asked under a misunderstanding, to the effect that reality is determinate, is there to be described, in ways in which it is not. It is this sense that comes to the fore when Pelléas starts to question Mélisande, in their first scene by the fountain, before the ring is lost: and before he learns, as he tacitly does learn, that questioning may not find out anything – something which Golaud, in a way which forms the centre of the tragedy, can never understand. ‘Why didn’t you want Golaud to kiss you?’ Pelléas asks: ‘Oh, oh,’ she says, and points out something she saw in the water. The accompaniment, tuned here as in so much of the work to the smallest movements of the mind, expresses the troubling of its surface, as of the water. And when the ring has fallen in the well, and she asks what she is to tell Golaud, Pelléas in the last line of the scene replies, ‘La vérité, la vérité’ – words which echo hollowly against the fact that even the bare happening she cannot tell him; because of the deeper fact that if there was any real truth about that occasion, it did not consist in that bare happening. It is the notion of a determinate truth about Pelléas and Mélisande that Golaud so obsessionally and destructively pursues: even, terribly, to her deathbed in the last act, where that word, ‘la vérité’, is hammered out again and again; and even then when Golaud gets answers, he does not have answers to the questions he meant. ‘Did you love Pelléas?’ – ‘Why yes, I loved him. Where is he?’ – ‘Don’t you understand? . . . were you guilty?’ – ‘No, we were not guilty, why are you asking me this?’ And then in his brutal insistence on being told, he fails to notice or care that he is telling her something, that she is going to die.
Linked to the central idea of a truth which is not to be had in the terms that Golaud understands are the contrasting images of blindness and sight, and of darkness and light, which run through the work. The ancient Arkel is nearly blind, but not entirely so; but Golaud, his desire for his truth finally frustrated, will die ‘like a blind man’. ‘It is no use asking,’ he says at the end, with Mélisande dying, ‘she is already too far from us’: irony indeed that Golaud should think that is the problem, when in the scene of his assault on her he could learn nothing, and was driven mad by learning nothing, from her great eyes, although he was ‘so close to them that I could feel the breath their lids made in closing’.
The most desparate enactment of Golaud’s need for what he supposes would be knowledge is that scene, at the end of Act III, in which he first questions the child Yniold about Pelléas and Mélisande, and then lifts him up to look into her room. Once again it is questions, insistent questions, and first they get answers, but tantalising answers, which run obliquely to what Golaud wants to hear: but then the child is frightened, the reflecting surface breaks up, and there are no answers at all.
This very subtle, but also very frightening, scene lays bare the difficulty in staging Pelléas, a difficulty which is very real: among the great masterpieces of the operatic stage, I think it may well be the hardest to present.
The difficulty lies in keeping the edge on Golaud’s questions, the human pain that goes into their being asked, while preserving the sense that they do not have, at any important level, answers, that no reality corresponds to them. Go one way, and one has a mysterious haze, with music indeed sensuous and marvellously structured, but losing human and dramatic interest: go the other, and one is left with the irritable feeling that there must be a truth there, and it is a tiresome and accidental limitation that we and Golaud do not know what it is. The performance must not let us be seized by Golaud’s conviction – that if one could get into little Yniold’s point of view, one would learn some vital thing.
Golaud is standing in the dark, trying to see what is in the light, using the eyes of a child. But he, of all people, is not capable of using the eyes of a child; if he were, he would not be doing what he is doing. He lacks vision because he is both too old and not grown-up enough. For him Pelléas and Mélisande are children; he repeatedly and with increasing anxiety assures himself that their relations are those of children, and after the killing, in the last act, he falls back briefly and unconvincingly on this: they kissed like little children, brother and sister. But his image of childhood itself is blankly simple, like his image of innocence: they both involve lack of what he would count as knowledge. And Mélisande does lack what he would count as knowledge, since she is not at all knowing; but her innocence (if that is what it is) can be on very level terms with honest understanding, as when she says to Pelléas in the last scene of Act IV, ‘I only lie to your brother.’
Golaud’s idea of the childlike is only that of the childish, and the crude betrayal implicit in that is displayed when, in the second act, he sternly reminds Mélisande that she is not a child – when he encourages her to adjust herself to this dark castle in its black forest, where everyone is old; joy does not come every day, he says to an accompaniment of ultimate desolation; and he tells her that she is too old to weep at not seeing the sky.
But where the sky and light are, is the air, also, and the sea. They represent life; and not to weep at not seeing the sky is not to care about having died. The sense of air and the light of the sea is very powerful in this opera.
So, in the last scene of the first act, where, after talk of the sombre forest round the castle, ‘Look round that side, look the other way,’ Mélisande is told, ‘and you will see the light of the sea’: and then darkness falls, and the ship departs, the ship which brought Mélisande there (another unanswered question); and then, as the wind rises on the sea, Pelléas takes Mélisande by the arm, for her hands are full of flowers, to help her down the dangerous path – their first physical contact.
This scene gains, and gives, further resonance when it is compared with the scenes in the third act in which Golaud and Pelléas go down to the vaults of the castle, and return again to the air. Now, it is Golaud who takes Pelléas by the arm, not the hands, as he leans over the cleft: but with a different wish. The darkness and suffocation here are the expression not only of Golaud’s murderous wish, but of his ignorance of it; the return to the air is the escape, not only from death, but from self-deception. It is marvellously realised in the music – almost too insistently, perhaps, in the interlude between the scenes, which, like all the interludes, Debussy added at the last moment.
Apart from the interlude, these scenes were composed early on, in 1894.
‘The scene in the underground caverns was done,’ he wrote to a friend, ‘filled with subtle terror, and mysterious enough to give vertigo to the best-inured soul! And also the scene on leaving those same caverns, filled with sunlight, but with sunlight bathed by our good mother the sea.’12 The return to our good mother the sea, and to the light, is the return from secret destructive wishes; but it is not the return to perfect knowledge, if we mean by that, that to every question we have, under the sky, an answer.
Rather, what we have there is a freedom from questions, or at least, from the wrong questions: what darkens, blinds and suffocates is not just ignorance, but the ignorant insistence on knowing, the attempt to determine the indeterminate: what lives in the light with open eyes, dies when it is clubbed with the demand for la vérité.
To this basic complex of themes, one scene must present a very special problem: the declaration scene at the fountain, the last of the fourth act, where Pelléas and Mélisande reveal their love to one another. For at this point the language of suggestion and indirection, both verbal and musical, has to give way to something more like direct statement; and so subtly has the sense of indeterminateness been created, that there must be a difficulty about what, exactly, that statement will be of. We know that Debussy had trouble with this scene. His work on it dates from the very beginning, in 1893, but he destroyed a first draft. ‘It isn’t at all right,’ he wrote. ‘It’s like a duet by . . . anyone at all. Worst of all, the ghost of old Klingsor, alias R.
Wagner, appeared at a turning in one of the bars. So I tore up the whole thing and set off in search of some more characteristic compound of phrases . . . I have quite spontaneously utilized a medium which seems a rather unusual means of expression, namely silence (don’t laugh).’13 And the scene is famous for the orchestral silence which accompanies, so to speak, the words ‘Je t’aime’ – ‘Je t’aime aussi.’ Justly famous, for it is very effective, but the critics’ emphasis on it, understandable when Pelléas was particularly seen as an anti-Wagnerian opera, can distract attention from other things which seem, in the context of this utterly original work, rather conventional; after the silence, and again after the closing of the gates has shut the pair out of the castle, the idiom comes for a moment or two dangerously close to the world of Massenet.
It seems significant to me that there is room for doubt here. For Debussy has created in the work up to this point an image of the inner life and its indirect relation to understanding, so extraordinary and original that none of the ways in which total explicitness can be used in opera is available to him. It is not just the sound of Tristan (in particular) which has to be avoided, or its length, or its loudness, but the whole idea of any convention by which the inner life is expressed totally, without qualification, and on the authority of the composer. So over these words, at this moment, it is not surprising that one should sense a certain artifice. But even if that is true for a page or so, the end of the same scene achieves a deep and upsetting effect, absolutely in keeping with the work, when in Golaud’s attack it presents a culminating image of blind ignorance. The most moving silence in this scene is perhaps not, after all, that of the orchestra, but of Golaud, as he plunges through the dark to destroy what he does not understand, and what is not even there to be, in his terms, understood.
Notes 1. Oscar Thompson, Debussy: Man and Artist (New York, 1967), p. 174.
2. In a letter to Ysaÿe: see Léon Vallas, Claude Debussy: His Life and Works, trans. Maire and Grace O’Brien (Oxford, 1944), p. 274.
3. Vallas, p. 84.
4. The remark was reported by André Fontainas: see Thompson, pp. 102–3, for the whole account of Debussy’s remarks at a Symbolist evening.
5. See Edward Lockspeiser, Debussy: His Life and Mind, 2 vols (London 1962, 1965), vol. 2, p. 90, n. 2.
6. Camille Bellaigue: Vallas, pp. 127–8.
7. Lockspeiser, vol. 1, p. 195.
8. Thompson, pp. 203–4.
9. See Lockspeiser, vol. 1, Appendix E.
10. Thompson, pp. 121–2.
11. Vallas, p. 86.
12. Thompson, p. 128.
13. Vallas, p. 86.
14. Joseph Kerman (Opera as Drama, New York, 1956, p. 190) has expressed a doubt about this scene, pointing out that it is the one place where Debussy is tempted to expand his musical material.
Manifest Artifice
The Ingenuity of Puccini
The criticism of operas, as distinct from the criticism of performances, is still not a very developed activity. Insofar as it exists, it has tended to concentrate on discussing the music, rather than operas as dramatic and musical wholes. The fact that there is not much serious criticism of Puccini’s operas is not, therefore, necessarily surprising. But such criticism as there is has tended to be hostile or contemptuous, and I suspect that, in this particular case, the lack of serious comment is itself a comment.
Puccini is not taken entirely seriously.
At the same time, several of his works are, of course, tirelessly successful with the public, and this is not hard to explain: they are, at their best, immensely and almost indestructibly effective. This fact is sometimes used as a humbling rejoinder to critical doubt – ‘so there’. In itself, it is not enough of a rejoinder, but it raises a demand, at least, for more understanding.
We perhaps tend to assume too easily that we understand Puccini, the character of his work and his place in the history of opera. In fact, he is not easy to place. It is not obvious, for instance, what comparisons it is useful to make with him. If one merely looks around him, to Leoncavallo, or Mascagni, or Giordano, he of course stands out, and his powers of lyrical invention seem magical. If one looks back to Verdi, Puccini becomes a small figure – but then not only was Verdi a great genius, but it was inconceivable that after him anyone could achieve anything of similar scale in Italian opera.
More interestingly, one can look sideways, to Richard Strauss, and indeed there is enough stylistically in common for a certain kind of now rather tired lyricism to be called the ‘Puccini-Strauss’ style. But they had very different aims and origins. In Italian opera, there was still such a thing as straightforward popular success, and Puccini aimed at it; while Strauss, as a German composer after Wagner, wrote orchestrally complex operas to Expressionist or Symbolist texts, as well as being a composer of ‘serious’ music outside the opera house. Strauss was, almost by definition, a more ‘serious’ composer than Puccini. But it is far from clear that as an opera composer he should therefore be taken more seriously.
Such comparisons in fact effect nothing until one has taken a closer look at what Puccini tried to do, and the individual musico-dramatic methods that he employed. Puccini is no doubt a limited artist, but his limitations, and the failings of his works, are themselves markedly individual. Tosca is at the centre of the problem of getting a clear and balanced view of Puccini. Of all his pieces it is one of the most famous for its theatrical effect. It is also distinctly nasty, in a way which helps to bring out critical hostility; in fact, it defines a central form of hostility towards the composer, since the touch of nastiness is typical of him, and Tosca presents the best-organised example of it. Butterfly is also nasty (particularly in the first version, which failed and which has only recently been revived) but it is much more sentimental, and the overall effect is of pathos rather than cruelty. Turandot is even more sadistic than Tosca – to the extent that, to permit the torture of Liu, the hero’s behaviour has to be made barely intelligible – but it is musically more ambitious, and it has the undoubted appeal that it defeated him: for once, Puccini was not so insufferably on top of it all.
Tosca is not perfect, even in its own terms, and it is more flawed, perhaps, than La Bohème. ‘Vissi d’arte’ is a not very interesting piece which, as Puccini himself later came to feel, holds up the action. In Act III, Cavaradossi’s nostalgic solo before the dénouement, ‘E lucevan le stelle’, leaves a desultory impression and seems not to contribute enough to the significance of the action. I suspect that in part this is because, like some other Puccini tenor arias – ‘Nessun dorma’ in Turandot is an obvious example – it is simply too short, and makes the effect of one shouted sentence rather than any revelation of character. The words of this aria replaced, at Puccini’s insistence, a heroic set of reflections on life and art which, we are told, attracted Verdi’s favourable attention when he was shown the libretto. Puccini found that he could do nothing with these, and set instead a reverie on past love-making. That fact in itself is not the cause of the weakness of the scene. Puccini is writing a different kind of work, and in some ways a more modern work, than any to which those heroic reflections would have been appropriate. Cavaradossi, like some other Puccini characters, is a man of softly impressionable sexuality – qualities already clearly expressed at the beginning of the opera in the aria addressed to his painting, ‘Recondita armonia’ . He seems to be a revolutionary hero largely by accident, and his involvement in the action is a good deal more personal than political. Even more striking than ‘E lucevan’ in this direction is his reaction to Tosca’s telling him that she has murdered Scarpia: he comes out with the sentimental and very pretty ‘O dolci mani’, which sweetly turns its back on anything that such a murder might mean. These pieces weaken the third act, as Puccini’s publisher, Giulio Ricordi, indeed complained. They do so not because they are personal and sexual rather than political, but because they do not move anything forward, or contribute any further dimension to what is going to happen. Especially in relation to Puccini’s insistence on compressed and rapid action (which he got, presumably, from Verdi), these static moments can seem simply opportunistic – particularly since ‘O dolci mani’ has one of those Puccini melodies that encourage tenors and conductors to reckless amounts of rubato.
There are, then, weaknesses in Tosca, even in terms of Puccini’s own conception of how it should work. But the interesting thing about Tosca lies in its suspect strength, in the fact that not only is it operatically successful, but it is a fundamental example of operatic success. It thus raises a question, not just about Puccini, and the special character of his achievement, but about the nature of opera itself.
There are a few basic ways of being excited and held by the operatic stage. The trio in the last act of Rosenkavalier represents one, and ‘Di quella pira’ in Trovatore another. Tosca at its best displays several. The end of Act I, for instance, with its mounting excitement and its superimposition of a great dark baritone declamation onto the rhythm of a tolling bell and religious ritual, is a splendid example of something that real opera lovers really love. Tosca’s continuous success with the public is not a mere triumph of bad taste or a result of contemporary associations, as has been the case with certain works of Meyerbeer, or Gounod, or Menotti. What is compelling in Tosca has direct connections with what is compelling in greater operas.
It is hard to think of a parallel to this in non-musical drama. Leaving aside questions of the limitations of his purely musical invention, the critical resistance to Puccini lies principally in the conviction that there is something manipulative or even cynical about his work. That conviction is, in my view, basically right. But that leaves the problem, since these manipulative works resemble, in their capacity to hold us, operas which have no such faults. If opera is at all a serious business, how can this be?
This is the question about Puccini, and its answer lies in what it is like to experience opera.
Auden’s remark that ‘the singer may be playing the role of a deserted bride, but we feel quite certain . . . that she is having a wonderful time’ makes the essential point that ‘the enjoyment of opera – and it is particularly true of Italian opera – grows tightly round enjoyment of a technique, a manifest technique.’1 Here there is an interesting comparison with, and an important difference from, conventions of the non-operatic stage.
When people who do not care for opera and know nothing about it ridicule the convention of conversation in song, it is right to remind them of other theatrical conventions, in particular the conventions of conversation in blank verse, which they may be less inclined to reject. In watching Shakespeare, one indeed appreciates it as verse – at least, if the director allows one to. Excitement, tension, involvement, are generated by that verse, and by its being verse, but in the opera house it goes further than this. It is not only song, and the fact that it is song, that generates excitement, but the singer. At a fine operatic performance, we are conscious of the singer’s achievement and of the presence of physical style and vitality, and the sense of this reinforces the drama itself. A concrete feeling of performance and of the performers’ artistry is nearer the front of the mind than in other dramatic arts. It is because of this that outbreaks of applause (if not, these days, the granting of encores) can be appropriate, as they scarcely could be with a play, even one in verse.
Puccini’s immense success is connected with the fact that the pleasures of opera, particularly in the Italian style, are in any case involved with an obvious and immediately presented artifice. He was of course ingenious (Toscanini said, ‘Puccini is clever, but only clever’), and he was greatly gifted in the creation of theatrical atmospheres and gestures – atmospheres and gestures which announce themselves as theatrical. In Act I of Tosca, the threatening arrival of Scarpia is synchronised with the climax of the horseplay between the sacristan and the choirboys, in a way which precisely draws attention to itself as a musical and dramatic device.
Similarly, the opening of the third act offers a complex and sophisticated texture of bells and a shepherd boy’s song which heightens the tension for what is to follow. These effects heighten it in a specially selfconscious and indirect way – by making one aware all the time that this has been conceived as a preparation for what is to follow.
Again, in the second act, Scarpia’s arrangement of his treachery gives pleasure through the very theatricality with which it is displayed. His instructions to Spoletta tell him, but not Tosca, that the execution of Cavaradossi is to be only a pretended fake, that the ‘simulated’ killing is to be a real one. ‘As we did in the case of Palmieri,’ says Scarpia, more than once: ‘You understand?’ ‘Yes,’ replies Spoletta, as he leaves, ‘like Palmieri’. It is appropriate that the subject of this should be a double falsehood, a pretence of a pretence. It is not simply a device of dramatic irony, which puts us into complicity with them against Tosca. It puts us into a complicity with that device itself, with a certain tradition of theatrical effect, and it is in seeing the wheels of artifice turn that we enjoy it.
The idea which Puccini carries further than any other opera composer is that of securing an effect through the audience’s consciousness that that is what he is doing. In exploiting this idea, he transfers to the level of musical and dramatic invention something that is always inherent, to some extent, in opera, and the performance of opera; and that is why one can acknowledge the truth of his talent to the nature of opera.
That acknowledged display of artifice, which is Puccini’s most characteristic device, is not of course enough to secure his popularity. For that he needed, what he outstandingly had, melodic gifts, orchestral ingenuity, a sense of atmosphere and a talent for compression. But, granted all that, the peculiarity of his talent does specially define the nature of the popularity that he achieved. In particular, it affects what it is like to see one of his operas with which one is already familiar. With a very great work, to hear it for the twentieth time gives the chance, not just to hear something one has missed, but to understand something new. That is not the point with Puccini, and everybody knows that it is not the point. The aim is, rather, to see him do the trick again; the better one knows the whole thing, and the more familiar the trick, the greater the pleasure, just because the pleasure lies in complicity with his artifice. One enjoys the entry of Scarpia very much more when it is not a surprise – that is to say, when one is not actually surprised by it, but rather knowledgeably looks forward to the effect of the surprise.
It is sometimes held against Puccini’s operas that they are melodramatic, but that is certainly not the notable or exceptional thing about them. As the word itself implies, it is hard for operas of strong action to be anything else, and many operatic masterpieces are melodramatic: Rigoletto, for instance, or, in good part, Fidelio. The special characteristic of Puccini’s operas is that they are manipulative – that in place of the direct address of those two works, for instance, or indeed of any work of Verdi’s, there is a calculated, and indeed displayed, contrivance to produce a certain emotional effect. The highly conscious and self-referential character of his method is a very modern feature of Puccini’s work, and he could not have stood anywhere but at the end of the tradition of Italian opera, extracting the last drops from it by the method of openly exploiting our consciousness of the ways in which it produced its effects. At the same time, what is achieved through this sensibility is limited – or at any rate defined – by a certain lack of expressive ambition, both musical and dramatic. In his use of swift narration, schematic characters and deftly indicated moods, together with his selfconscious exploitation of familiar conventions, Puccini is a cinematic artist, and some of the most natural comparisons that his works invite are with films. Use of a popular melodic style and the conventional directness of his narrative provoke comparisons not with ‘art’ films of, say, German Expressionism, but with the finest products of the Hollywood studios in their best days – which indeed, like Puccini, learnt some of their technique from more ambitiously innovative art works. It would be a mistake to take this as an insult to Puccini: these films are so excellent that the comparison gives no reason to underestimate his operas, but merely offers a better perspective from which to enjoy them.
Like many good Hollywood film-makers, moreover, Puccini found it natural to use distant, unreal or fantasy subject matter. In this his operas also resemble, of course, many other operas. But in Puccini’s case, something special is effected by the choice of subject. The fact that Verdi’s works are remotely placed (with the famous, and at first disastrous, exception of La traviata), and that Wagner’s are often placed nowhere at all, imposes in itself no limit at all on their power or honesty or significance. But in Puccini’s case, there is something suspect about the exoticism of the oriental pieces, and the fanciful quality of Bohème’s Parisian life. They provide an element of distancing, a way in which the work can be exciting or touching without being disturbing. Hollywood constantly used such methods, though it could also – in some of the crime films, for instance – go beyond them.
Here again, Tosca is the central and the test case. Tosca is, in fact, the exception, the one really twentieth-century subject among Puccini’s major works. It is totally unimportant that it is set in Napoleonic times. It really asks to be set in the twentieth century, above all in Mussolini’s Italy, with Scarpia as a Fascist boss. Many things in the opera fit such a time and such a régime, including the character of the villain. Scarpia’s corruption, and the sense, which I have already mentioned, that Cavaradossi is a man with other interests who got into it all by accident, conspire to make the torture scene more a psycho-sexual event than anything political, and this is a recognisably modern motive, of a kind inconceivable, certainly, in Verdi.
Yet it is just here, where Puccini gets close to a disturbing reality, that his method of exploiting the traditions of Italian opera rather than transforming them ceases to work, and the displayed artifice stops being any longer an acceptable source of pleasure. He was very skilful, for the most part, in avoiding that situation, by taking an exotic or fanciful subject matter, or very schematically indicated situations of horror or pathos. (It is ironical that ‘verismo’ should be the name given to some of these devices.) A danger always lay for him in the real strength of his fascination with violence, what he himself called his ‘Neronic instinct’. In some cases, notably La fanciulla del West, he channelled it in a direction of schematic fantasy which leaves room for his devices to work. In at least one case – parts of Turandot – the obsession rises above the devices.
In the second act of Tosca, however, his sadistic imagination pulls too strongly on what is indeed one of his most carefully structured pieces of artifice. The effect is one that many have found disturbing and disagreeable, and much more so than some other operas which contain, in terms of their action, equally brutal material. The careful placing of Cavaradossi’s off-stage cries gets its effect, like the earlier use of Tosca’s off-stage concert, once more through the consciousness of artifice: the music invites us to hear the effect being created. But the tension has been sufficiently raised, Scarpia is enough of a figure, the subject is close enough to reality, for pleasure not to run easily through such craftily constructed channels. Puccini’s best effects come about through the manifest use of feeling, of circumstance and of the audience; police torture, if we get near enough to an adequate representation of it, cannot be used in this way.
That there should be something nasty at the centre of Tosca is the result of Puccini’s method when it goes beyond the bounds of what it can handle. The method is a special and very effective invention, and it has a powerful appeal which is rooted in the traditions of Italian opera, and indeed in the basic experience of its performance. But the method cannot deal with a genuinely threatening content, and when it fails, the spectator’s revulsion is considerable, for he feels himself not only exploited, but an accomplice in his own exploitation. Tosca is remarkable in providing some of the most striking achievements of Puccini’s artifice, and also the most unnerving display of its limitations.
Note 1. ‘Notes on Music and Opera’, in The Dyer’s Hand (London, 1963), pp. 468–9. Auden agreed, however, that opera can be the ideal vehicle of ‘tragic myth’. See also ‘The World of Opera’, in his Secondary Worlds (London, 1969).
