PART ONE
Metaphysics and Epistemology
ONE
Tertullian’s Paradox
Non pudet, quia pudendum est . . . prorsus credibile est, quia ineptum est . . . certum est, quia impossibile.
—Tertullian, de carne Christi, v.
(1) This paper does not deal directly either with Tertullian or with his paradox. In considering the most famous and most widely misquoted of Tertullian’s paradoxes, I do not try to explain it, still less to explain it away; but take it as the starting-point and end of a discussion of religious language and of its relations to theology and to the kind of philosophical inquiry with which this book* is principally concerned. In particular, I try to bring out a certain tension, a pull between the possible and the impossible, a sort of inherent and necessary incomprehensibility, which seems to be a feature of Christian belief, and to locate this point of tension more exactly within the structure of the belief. This tension Tertullian seems to have felt very strongly, and characteristically proclaimed it with vigour; but it is only by this rather thin string that my remarks are tied to what Tertullian said, the strict interpretation of which would require something quite different.
As the path of this paper is rather circuitous, a rough map may help. After stating the paradox (2), I go on to a short discussion of paradoxes in general, their uses and demands (3). I then leave Tertullian for a while, and attempt to show some features which distinguish religious, or at least Christian, language from other kinds of language (4); this is done by presupposing the existence of God, which may seem a rather peculiar procedure for a sceptic, but which will, I hope, serve for a discussion which tries to show something about religious language as used by believers. The thesis is then proposed that Christian belief must involve at least one statement which is about both God and the world, and that this statement must be partly incomprehensible—which I hold to be suggested by Tertullian’s paradox, if given its head (5). Some remarks are then made on theology, and its relations to religious language and to the philosophy of religious language; these raise considerations that stop an incipient discussion of the incarnation, and suggest some rather disheartening conclusions about both the philosophy of religious language and theology (6). I end (7) with some observations about faith and about what one may or may not be said to believe on faith.
Tertullian’s paradox I represent as a paradox both about Christian belief and about theology, but it is the former that is the more important point. In both cases I consider it as a paradox about meaning rather than about truth; that is, it is with questions of what is being said in religious language that I am concerned, rather than with questions of whether what is said is true, although the two sorts of question are not (and cannot be) kept clinically apart.
(2) Tertullian, the first Latin father of the Church, started his career as a lawyer and ended it as a heretic. After his conversion from heathenism in 196 he remained for only five or ten years a member of the Orthodox Church; both then and after his lapse into the Montanist heresy, he produced a series of theological works remarkable for vigorous reasoning, an unabashed use of legalistic rhetoric against his opponents, and an intransigent acceptance of paradoxical conclusions. The paradox I want to discuss comes from a work entitled de carne Christi which he wrote in the year 208, ‘libris’, as the Patrologia (Viet. Tert.) elegantly puts it, ‘iam Montanismam redolentibus’—‘at a time when his writings were already stinking of Montanism’—but the work is not itself, I believe, heretical. He is attacking Marcion, who believed that Christ was not actually born of the flesh, but was a ‘phantasma’ of human form. Marcion’s refusal to believe in a genuine incarnation, Tertullian argues, could come only from a belief either that it would be impossible, or that it would be unworthy, a shameful degradation of the divine nature. Against the view that it would be impossible he produces the sweeping and general principle ‘nihil impossibile Deo nisi quod non vult’—‘nothing is impossible for God except what he does not wish to do’. In particular Marcion had argued that the idea of the incarnation of God involved a contradiction, because being born as a human being would involve a change in the divine nature;2 but a change involves ceasing to have some attributes and acquiring others; but the attributes of God are eternal; therefore he cannot change; therefore he could not have been born as a human being. Against this Tertullian says that this is to argue falsely from the nature of temporal objects to the nature of the eternal and infinite. It is certainly true of temporal objects that if they change they lose some attributes and acquire others; but to suppose that the same is true of God is just to neglect the necessary differences between God and temporal objects (de c. C. iii). (I shall in section (6) of this paper say something about this, perhaps not immediately convincing, argument.) Finally, against the view that, even if it were possible, God could not wish to be incarnated, because it would be unworthy of him, Tertullian, summing up his objections to Marcion in a passage of great intensity, accuses him of overthrowing the entire basis of the Christian faith: his argument would destroy the crucifixion and the resurrection as well. ‘Take these away, too, Marcion,’ he says (ibid., v), ‘or rather these: for which is more unworthy of God, more shameful, to be born or to die? . . . Answer me this, you butcher of the truth. Was not God really crucified? And as he was really crucified, did he not really die? And as he really died, did he not really rise from the dead? . . . Is our whole faith false? . . . Spare what is the one hope of the whole world. Why do you destroy an indignity that is necessary to our faith? What is unworthy of God will do for me . . . the Son of God was born; because it is shameful, I am not ashamed: and the Son of God died; just because it is absurd, it is to be believed; and he was buried and rose again; it is certain, because it is impossible.’ ‘Non pudet, quia pudendum est . . . prorsus credibile est, quia ineptum est . . . certum est, quia impossibile’: that is Tertullian’s paradox.
(3) People who express themselves in paradoxes are in a strong position; and the more outrageous the paradox, in general the stronger the position. For an objector who insists on pointing out the absurdity of what has been said is uneasily conscious that he is making a fool of himself, for all he is doing is pointing out that the paradox is paradoxical, and this was perfectly obvious already: he is like a man who has missed the point of a joke or an ironical remark or an imaginative comparison, and insists on taking it literally. But ironical remarks and imaginative comparisons can have their point, and so can paradoxes; so it will not do, either, for the objector to dismiss the paradox in the hope that its evident absurdity makes it unworthy of discussion; for this is again to suggest that the person who uttered the paradox had overlooked its absurdity, but on the contrary he knew that it was absurd, and that was one reason why he uttered it. Because people do not in general utter absurdities unless they make a point by doing so, it is felt that the paradoxographer must have been saying something important. He not only prevents the critics answering, but makes them feel that in some mysterious way he is in a better position than they are; he is rather like a normally well-dressed man who appears at a function in a black tie and tails: the others present can’t mention it to him, they can’t overlook him, and they feel uneasy about their own turn-out. Or, again, he is something like a man who firmly closes a door in one’s face: not only preventing one from going on, but making one feel one has no right to.
So far the paradoxographer has everything on his side, but it is not entirely so. For, as the man in the black tie, to make his effect, has usually to be well-dressed, and the man who closes the door has to be someone one respects, so the paradoxographer has to have some other claim on the attention of his audience: for in general a paradox, however suggestive in itself, does not represent solid earnings—it draws a little on yesterday’s credit or mortgages a little of tomorrow’s. This claim on one’s attention can be possessed in various ways: positively, by the utterer being a good and impressive and genuine person whose life commands love and respect, or by other utterances of his being original and profound; and negatively, by other conflicting, or apparently conflicting, claims on our attention being confused and unhelpful, or made by persons whose way of life seems trivial, evil or disastrous. If this is so, we might expect to find the beliefs of a religion, for instance, being put forward with a particularly defiant paradoxicality in two sorts of situation: first, when its believers are intensely bound together by a new and compelling faith, and fighting for survival in a hostile but decaying society whose beliefs they utterly reject; and second when, whatever the divisions and discredit that have fallen on the belief itself, those who reject it, their own hopes perishing, seem to have little to offer in its place except angst, tyranny or imminent thermonuclear annihilation.
This, however, so far as it goes, suggests only why people, and in particular religious believers, should tend at one time rather than at another to express themselves in paradoxes; it says little about why anyone should ever at all choose to speak in paradoxes, or suggests at most that they do this as a striking way of getting people to listen to or consider something else. Often it is not much more: to say, for instance, that the Holy Roman Empire was not Holy, nor Roman, nor an Empire, is, or should be, a brisk way of preparing for a new historical analysis. But there are other paradoxes which seem more important and significant; where to grasp the paradox seems an essential part of understanding what is being said. Here we have the feeling that a paradox, granted that it has to be understood against a background of other beliefs or a way of life, itself tells us something: that it is in a certain way the essence of what is to be believed. This is particularly so in the case of religious beliefs, where the feeling has itself been expressed in many ways: perhaps by saying, that there is an infinity of things that are beyond our comprehension; or that our reason cannot embrace the deepest truths; or that what we say can only be an unsatisfactory (or, perhaps, analogical) account of what we believe on faith. I shall try to show how such a point of tension, of failure of language, must occur in religious belief, and I think, therefore, that we should take Tertullian’s paradox seriously; not as just a rhetorical expression of his objections to a particular doctrine, but as a striking formulation of something which I shall suggest is essential to Christian belief.
(4) There has been much discussion in recent years of religious language and its relations to other types of language; a good deal of this discussion has been concentrated on religious statements, and a good deal of this on the one statement ‘God exists’. I think it is now time to consider whether such concentration has not been too narrow: for in each respect it has had undesirable results. First, there is an unclarity in the idea of a language—meaning by this, of course, not a national or dictionary language, such as French or Esperanto, but a logically distinguishable language or type of discourse. Second, the concentration on religious statements, as distinct from other types of religious utterance, has produced a string of disruptive effects: it has overemphasized the difference between the apparently unfalsifiable religious statement and the falsifiable statement of the sciences, which is indeed important and will appear later in what I have to say, but which taken by itself leads to an impasse which looks a little like a reduplication in linguistic terms of the barren nineteenth-century dispute between science and religion; and efforts to get out of this impasse have involved, in some cases, attempts to reduce statements of religion to statements of something else, for instance, of mystical experience, and in others attempts to reduce statements of religion to other things that are not statements at all, such as commands or exhortations to a religious way of life—all of which either involve an evident circularity or omit the peculiarly religious character of the statements altogether. Third, there has been the concentration on the logic of the particular statement ‘God exists’; this shows a kind of hopeless courage. It shows courage because this statement seems to be the lynch-pin of the whole system: to uncover what is involved in believing this should be to uncover the whole nature of religious language and the essence of religious belief. But it is just the peculiar importance of this statement that makes hopeless an inquiry that starts with it. Its peculiarity is such that it is extremely untypical of religious statements; a peculiarity emphasized by Collingwood, for instance, when he said that it was not a religious statement at all, but rather the presupposition of any religious statement. We might say that the statement of God’s existence has indeed great logical power, but that it is the power not so much of a lynch-pin as of a lever: if we knew, from outside the religious system, how to work with it, we might move heaven and earth; but from outside we do not, because we know neither where we may fix a fulcrum nor where we can insert the other end of the lever. So rather than attempt such a direct approach, we must obey the Boyg, and go round.
I cannot hope to go far round, but perhaps something can be said. First, then, I think we must always bear in mind the fact that religious language is not used just for making statements, but that there are many other kinds of religious utterance: commands, for instance (‘Thou shalt not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain’), and, very importantly, prayers, and expressions of trust (‘Though he destroy me, yet will I wait for him’), and promises, and reprimands, and many others. Furthermore, none of these utterances, including the statements, is made in vacuo: sometimes they are used as part of a religious ceremony or observance, sometimes as part of a religious person’s deciding what to do in a practical situation; and generally as part of the activities of life. This as a general point is one constantly emphasized by Wittgenstein; and in considering religious language it is, I think, particularly disastrous to ignore it.
But what is religious language? Is there one thing which is religious language? With what is it being contrasted? One thing, certainly, with which we must be wary of contrasting or comparing it is that nebulous and pervasive substance, ‘ordinary language’. For one thing ordinary language should be the language used by most of us in going about our ordinary occasions, and the question of how religious that is, is the question of how religious or professedly religious most of us are; and if some of us all of the time, and most of us most of the time, do not bring talk about God into our affairs, that seems to be at least as much something about us as something about talk about God. This raises the question of dispensing with talk about God, of what is involved in doing without it; and about that I shall later say a little.
So one might ask, ‘What are in general the distinguishing marks of a language, of a type of discourse?’; and in attempting an outline of an answer, one can think at once of at least five possible distinguishing marks. For one language might be distinguished from another by the types of logical relation holding within it; by its subject-matter; by its use of technical terms; by its purposes; or, more generally, by the activities with which its use is associated. But it would, of course, be an illusion to suppose that these five, even if they were satisfactorily distinguished one from another, would be competitors for the position of the one and only distinguishing mark of one language from another; it is rather that from the inter-relation of features like these we can, in particular cases, justifiably claim to distinguish one type of discourse from another. Which of these features one would particularly consider is a question partly of at what level the distinctions are being drawn. If we concentrate on distinctions between the sciences, at a low level of generality, we tend to fasten on distinctions of subject-matter, for we all learn at school that mycology is the study of fungi, and geology the study of rocks, and so on. But it is clear that in doing this we presuppose already a distinction between scientific and other discourse, and between one type of science and another: for not all talk about plants, for instance, and not even all scientific talk about them is botanical talk. Nor will the distinction of subject-matter apply at all to any but the most naive distinctions between subsidiary sciences, the distinction elsewhere—for instance, between physics and physical chemistry—lying rather in the scope and terminology of the laws formulated and employed.
But it is not to the present purpose, even if it were possible, to attempt the high Aristotelian task of characterizing the differences between organized bodies of knowledge. For while it may be possible to characterize the language used by some type of scientist in his professional work, or to characterize a professional scientific activity to distinguish it from some other professional activity, such as that of the historian, this is beside our purpose, which is to characterize some unprofessional uses of language as distinct from others. It does seem clear, however, that when we, as laymen, speculate on the distance of a star, for instance, we are using language differently from when we remark on how beautifully it now shines; and that if we say that the first is a scientific use, part of what we mean is that we are asking a question to which the professional scientist is in the best position to give an answer—it is the sort of question he is asking. So we can at this point reintroduce the idea of a professional use of language, and say at least this much: that some of our utterances ask or involve questions that are properly to be answered by techniques and methods of inquiry professionally employed by some types of specialist, and others do not do this.
This distinction does not apply in any simple way to our investigation of religious language. In the case of religious belief, there is indeed the notion of a person who is a religious authority, but this is something quite different from a scientific authority. For first, the religious authority, if there is one, is at least not just someone who has a good training in the methods of answering certain sorts of question, but someone who has the authority to lay down what is to be believed or done. Second, the question of whether there is a religious authority even in this sense and, if so, who it is, has been the occasion of violent dispute, and many people have been killed in the attempts to settle it. But the dispute was about the settling of admittedly religious questions, so a reference to the authority cannot come into the characterization of a religious question. Third, even if we were to say that a specialist or professional use of religious language was to be found in its theological use (and about theology I shall have something to say later), it is clear that the relation of religious language to the theologian is different fromthe relation of scientific language to the scientist; one who speaks scientifically is at least an amateur scientist, but one who speaks religiously is not necessarily a theologian, even an amateur one.
How, then, can we attempt a characterization of religious, or at least of Christian, utterances, made in their ordinary occasions by persons other than professional theologians? Could we say, for instance, to take up one of the suggested criteria, that certain language was to be characterized as religious, or more specifically as Christian, by reference to certain practices or observances in the course of which it was used? It is clear that such a reference could not give us enough. For, first, the ceremonies would themselves have to be characterized as religious ceremonies, and if we could do this, we should already have a clearer idea of what religious language was. Second, many religious utterances are made outside such ceremonies; unless everyone speaks religiously only on Sundays. The ceremonies might in the end have to be mentioned in a full characterization of a religious life; but what we are looking for must first be found elsewhere. We have seen that in attempting the characterization of other kinds of language, the distinction of subject-matter, of what the language is used about, did not take us very far; but in the case of religious language perhaps we should after all return to it. For religious language, we might say, is, peculiarly, language about God; and by ‘peculiarly’ I mean not only that all religious language is language about God, but—and this seems to me an important point—that all language about God is religious language.
But to say that religious language is language about God immediately raises three related difficulties. For first, the word ‘about’ is misleading. In the most normal linguistic sense of ‘about’, it is statements that are about things or persons; but, as we have already seen, not all religious utterances are statements—a prayer, for instance, is not about God, but is addressed to him. If we are to say, then, that religious language is language about God, we have to take ‘about’ in an extremely wide sense. I take it that it would not be disputed by Christians that every religious utterance in some sense comes back to God, perhaps in the sense that if the purpose of the utterance is to be explained, God has in the end to be mentioned. In something like this sense, the word ‘about’ must be understood. I think we have to say, further, that the mere occurrence of the word ‘God’ in an utterance does not mean that it is actually about God, and so religious; for the most devout may use the word ‘God’ in idle phrases and not mean really to speak about God. An utterance which includes the word ‘God’ must be seriously meant to be about him for it to be actually about him.
Conversely—and this is the second difficulty—it is not the case that the word ‘God’ has to occur in an utterance for it to be religious. We could put this by saying that the distinction of subject-matter cannot be reduced to another distinction I mentioned, that of technical terminology. For there are many utterances that are religious even in the sense of ‘Christian’ but do not involve the word ‘God’; and, more widely, there is religious language that is not the language of Christianity. To say that this other religious language is language about God, where ‘God’ is understood in a Christian sense, is at least to prejudge a particular theological issue, concerning the reference and truth of religious beliefs other than Christianity; but the fact that there is an issue here shows that there must be some characterization of a religion, and so of religious language, which is independent of the beliefs of Christianity. Thus we have to say that our characterization is one not of religious language in general, but of that of Christianity; and this will do for the purposes of this discussion.
But is it even this? For—and this is our third difficulty—saying that Christian language is language about God evidently presupposes the truth of Christianity in a far more radical sense, for it presupposes the existence of God. Therefore it looks as if we have to say that, if God exists, the language of Christianity is language about God, and this seems useless as a characterization of such language. For if we start from the statement of God’s existence, the characterization is vacuous unless we already know that statement to be true; but if we know that statement to be true, the characterization appears superfluous. If, however, we start from the evident existence of Christian language, in the sense of language used by Christians, we might be tempted to arrive at the statement of God’s existence, and so involve ourselves in a kind of ontological proof which might well be considered suspect. This all illustrates the peculiar relation to religious language of the statement of God’s existence, which I have already mentioned. If we were seeking an independent characterization of Christian language these difficulties would be damning; but my present aim is not to do this, but to leave on one side the question of God’s existence, and to try to show something about Christian language as used by Christians. So perhaps this rather paradoxical approach will not prove entirely useless. I shall therefore continue to speak of Christian language in a way that involves a suspension of disbelief, the suspension being achieved, evidently, by our own bootstraps. I have suggested, then, that all Christian language is language about God. I suggested before that all language about God is religious language, and this must stand, if it stands at all, in its original form: for to say that all language about God is Christian language is to prejudge to the opposite effect the theological issue, which I mentioned before, about the status of other religions.
But here perhaps we have an important point about religious language: or we saw before that, while the language of botany is language about plants, not all language about plants is botanical: for poets, painters, ramblers and so on may also speak of plants, but not botanically. But I want to suggest that all language about God is religious language—one cannot speak non-religiously about God. It does not follow from this that atheists are necessarily speaking religiously: for they are denying the statement ‘God exists’, and to do this goes behind the presuppositions of the present discussion. It does, however, follow from the present thesis that blasphemy is a kind of religious language, and such it must be—for how else could it give so much offence? Blasphemy is the misuse of religious language: it is to say things about God, or to ask things of him, but the wrong things. Yet there seems to be a sort of paradox here: for the blasphemer says, for instance, that God is wicked, and gives offence by so speaking of the Christian God. But the Christian God is good; so must not the blasphemer be speaking of some other God? But if he does this, he either gives no offence, because it was not of the Christian God that he was speaking offensively, or gives offence only by suggesting that there is another God—a line of argument that might lead to the intriguing conclusion that the only form of heresy is polytheism. Perhaps here we must say something like what we say about disagreements concerning characters in the historical past, that there must be some beliefs, and in the case of religion some practices, in common, between the blasphemer and the orthodox to support the idea that they are both talking about the same God: when Housman referred to ‘Whatever fool or blackguard made the world’, the description ‘He who made the world’ provided the place from which the offence was to be taken.
If we say, then, that all language about God is religious language, we have said something about religious language and its subject-matter which distinguishes these from, say, botanical language and its subject-matter. We must next consider one type of utterance which, very importantly, occurs within the body of religious language. I have stressed the fact that religious utterances can be of very various types: statements, commands, prayers, etc.; but it is important also that when we consider only those religious utterances that are statements we find that they as well can be of very various types. Some may be statements directly about the nature of God: ‘God is three Persons’; some about historical events: ‘God sent the Jews into exile’; some about human nature: ‘God has given men free-will’; and so on. That is to say, there are many religious statements that are not just religious—although they are about God, they are about something else as well, something involving the affairs of men.
(5) We must now look more closely at the way in which some religious statements, to confine ourselves to statements, are not purely about God, but about human affairs as well; for by doing this we may become clearer about the range of religious language, its relation to other language and to theology: and we shall return, at long last, to Tertullian’s paradox. Because religious statements are so various, many different ones should be discussed, but here I shall mention only one. It raises in itself some well-flogged issues, but these I do not want to discuss: I take this example only to illustrate a more general point.
If a people suffer from occasional failure of their crops and subsequent starvation, a person of rather Old Testament faith might say: ‘God makes the crops fail to punish the people for their wickedness.’ Such a statement is certainly a religious statement of a sort, but it is also a statement about certain events in human life, and seems in fact to provide an explanation of them; and it seems most clearly to do this, and looks logically like a non-religious explanation of the same events, because it connects with each other two sets of human events—the wickedness of the people and the failure of their crops—with God, as it were, as a middle term. As such, the statement seems also to be in a crude sense falsifiable. For when the agriculturists arrive, the irrigation is improved, the crops never fail, and the people riot in wickedness in the midst of plenty, the man who said that the crops failed because of the people’s wickedness notoriously falls into discredit. People will cease to talk of God in explaining the success or failure of the crops: one sort of religious statement will cease to be made. This is the familiar phenomenon of the elimination of religious language from a context; and it has been eliminated here not just because people have come no longer to speak in a certain way—as a people might cease to write some sort of poetry—but because the religious statement, in this particular crude example, was a kind of explanation, and was run over by a rival and better explanation. We mentioned before a distinction of languages in terms of specialists and their techniques, and where a language in the specialist sense can clash with religious language, religious language tends to be driven out; because the specialist techniques give explanations which are recommendations for effective action, and where religious language claimed to do that, it failed: for either it gave an ‘explanation’ which wasn’t an explanation in this sense at all, and provided no recommendation, or it gave an explanation, as in the case of the crops, but a very bad one—for if anyone believes that the best way to prevent natural disasters is to live a better life, he appears to be in error.
It would, of course, be a crude mistake to suppose that these antique considerations could, in some sense, ‘disprove religion’. What they do show is that if religious language is used to give certain sorts of explanation, it clashes with a more effective explanation and tends to be eliminated. Such elimination has its effect, too, on the theology of the user of the language. For the religious explanation, as we have seen, was a statement both about certain events and about God; and if these statements are seen to be inapplicable to events, they are seen to be inapplicable also to God. Hence it will come to be seen, perhaps, that certain things cannot be said of God: for instance, that he produces particular disasters as a punishment to men. This in turn leads to new speculation about the nature of God and his relation to the world; so that a change in the possible uses of religious language is connected with a change in the views about the nature of God. This works also the other way; for it would be false to represent the situation as one of the constant retreat of religious language, with consequent trimming of theological doctrine. Undoubtedly this has happened; but there may also be new thoughts about God and new moral views and following from these, changes in what can be said in religious language; as with the coming of Christianity less was said about the anger of God and more about his mercy, and as there comes with a change in religious belief a change in what it is considered proper to ask of him in prayer. An attempt may be made at each stage to co-ordinate the implications of what men think they can and ought to say in religious language, and such co-ordination takes the form of a series of statements about the nature of God: and this is systematic theology.
But although the changes in the range of religious language are not to be described entirely as a retreat, the retreat, as we all know, has its dangers for the religion. The supposed religious explanation that we mentioned was in its rough way one statement about both God and the world; and if all statements that are about both God and the world were to be abandoned, what would be left? Such statements would not need to be, as that one was, explanatory of what goes on in the world, and indeed could not be; but there are connections other than explanations, and some such there must surely be. Wittgenstein said (Tractatus, 6.432): ‘How the world is, is completely indifferent for what is higher. God does not reveal himself in the world.’ But if all talk about God were talk only about God, and all talk about the world talk only about the world, how could it be that God was the God of the Christian believer, who is a toiler in the world of men? Would not the views about the nature of God retire more and more away from the world of men: his existence would become like that of the gods of Epicurus, ‘far remote and cut off from our affairs’ (Lucretius, de Rerum Natura, II, 648). And if that happened, it could not be of much concern whether he were there or not.
(6) This is where we return to Tertullian. Tertullian’s paradox is relevant to this question both because it is a paradox and because it is about the incarnation. For the incarnation seems to be the point for the Christian faith, where there must essentially be an intersection of religious and non-religious language; it has to be said not only that a certain person was crucified, but that that person was the Son of God. This has to be said, as Tertullian clearly saw, if there is to be a Christian faith; and as he equally clearly saw, it is a paradox. The paradox comes about because, although we must have some statement which says something about both God and the world, when we have it we find that we have something that we cannot properly say. For when God is spoken of in purely religious language, he is said to be a Person eternal and perfect, that is, we do not speak of him in terms appropriate to the temporal and imperfect objects and persons of this life; or if we do, it is notoriously by the analogy of which theologians speak, and therefore imperfectly. For there is no language for God’s eternity and perfection beyond the statement of it: it can be said that God is eternal and perfect, not how he is, for God’s eternity and perfection must be beyond the reach of our understanding. So when we come to a statement that is about both God and temporal events, it must be unsatisfactory; for if it were not, we should have adequately described the relation of the temporal events to God in terms appropriate only to the temporal events: and this would mean either that we had described only the temporal events, and left God out, or had described God as a temporal being, which he is not.
The difficulty seems to follow not from the eternity of God by itself, but from the conjunction of this with his perfection as a personal being. For some have held, for instance, that the numbers are eternal objects, although mathematical statements about things in the world can satisfactorily be made. One difference of this case from that of God could be marked by saying that, leaving aside the question of application, the nature of the numbers in themselves can be adequately expressed in the language appropriate to this, the language of pure mathematics, but the nature of God cannot be adequately expressed in any human language. But if we say this, it looks as though we were defending now a different thesis about religious language. For this seems to say that any statement about God, whether we say that there is a relation between God and the world or not, will be unsatisfactory, just because it is made in the words of human language; but the thesis was that it is the fact that there must be a relation between God and the world that made religious language unsatisfactory. But it is not really a different thesis; for it is just the fact that there is at some point such a relation, and a statement or set of statements that try to express it, that makes religious language elsewhere also unsatisfactory. The question of the applicability of mathematics to the world does not affect the question of the expression of the nature of the numbers by pure mathematics; but the question of the relation of God to the world does affect the question of the expression of the nature of God in religious language. The actual effect is that God is said to be a perfect personal being; because, for instance, prayers are addressed to him, and because he has a Son who was born into the world. The statement of these relations will be itself unsatisfactory, and will involve others that are so: because the concepts required—of fatherhood, for instance, and of love, and of power—are acquired in a human context; the language of these things is a language that grows and is used for the relations of humans to humans. To say that, while this is so, religious language requires merely an extrapolation from the human context,3 is not to solve the problem but to pose it again. For the extrapolation required is an extrapolation to infinity, and in even trying to give a sense to this we encounter the incomprehensibility. This incomprehensibility Tertullian has brought out in his paradox.
In fact, it is a double paradox: ‘because it is shameful’, Tertullian says, ‘I am not ashamed . . . it is certain, because it is impossible’; that is, there is something that is morally outrageous about it, and there is something intellectually outrageous. The two paradoxes can perhaps be seen by considering the incarnation from two different directions. That God, a perfect being, should be willing to be born and to be crucified, is morally astonishing; that this man on a cross should actually be God is intellectually astonishing. Of these, the moral paradox is perhaps the more readily comprehensible to the unbeliever; for this at least he has a model, in the ideas of humility and sacrifice and the finding of the greatest value not where the worldly are looking for it. So the unbeliever, perhaps impertinently, may feel that he sees a point to the moral paradox—that it has turned upside down the standards of what is to be admired and loved. The feeling is easier, perhaps dangerously so, because we have a Christian tradition: to the educated Roman, for instance, it must have been deeply shocking. In this case, too, we can understand to some extent what is in fact the centre of the paradox, Tertullian’s saying not just that it was absurd and he believed it, but that he believed it because it was absurd. It was just the outrageousness of the crucifixion that pointed the new way one had to try to follow in one’s life,4 and how can any of this be applied to the second part of the paradox, to the fact of the incarnation? How can it be certain, because it is impossible? How can we come to understand, how can we give any sense to, the statement that this man who was crucified was God?
Here I encounter fully a difficulty that has been gradually making itself felt throughout. For the examination of the meaning of statements about the incarnation is, or certainly has been, a task for the theologian; and not being a theologian I cannot feel competent to undertake it. And yet, by starting out to look at religious language I seem to have reached a point at which it is necessary to turn into a theologian. I think we can see the reason for this if we consider what has already been said about religious language and theology. I suggested before that there was a relation between what can and cannot be said in religious language and systematic theology; that a contraction or extension in the use of religious language leads to changes in the theology; and that the systematization and explanation of the implications of what can be said about God is a task of theology. But this seems to have two consequences. For the theology examines and changes by reference to the logical consequences of speaking in this or that way about God: if we cannot say ‘God sent the drought to punish the people’, we must say that God does not intervene in the operations of natural law; if we say this, are we to say that God’s power is limited or that he himself is willing not to intervene?—and so on: all traditional problems of theology. And if we say that God was incarnated, are we to say that he changed?—Marcion’s problem. But if the raising of these questions is a task of theology, then theology seems to include the logical analysis of religious language; for surely the logical analysis of religious language is just this, asking how, and with what implications, utterances are made in religious contexts. So the philosopher who regards his task as the logical analysis of language and who sets out to examine religious language will find himself, I suspect, as I have done, doing theology. This, which is the first consequence, seems to me not too happy a one for the supposedly independent analyst of religious language. For I have a suspicion that as a theologian he will turn out rather poorly; as some indeed have, supposing themselves to be raising for the first time logical difficulties in Christian language which have in fact in one guise or another been the concern of theologians for centuries. If he is not a believer at all, his case will be worse still, for the utterances are not just there, to be pulled to pieces without understanding of the context in which they are used; but can he understand what is the context and importance of a prayer, for instance, unless he understands what it is to pray? Any more than a man can write on the language of aesthetics who cannot see beyond a coloured photograph of ‘The Laughing Cavalier’.
The first consequence I suggest, then, of the status of theology is that there is not much hope for an independent logical analysis of religious language; and the second is its converse: that if one task of theology is such an analysis, theology is committed to making itself coherent, and coherent not only with itself, but outside as well. We have already seen how religious language might retreat from human affairs into an Epicurean remoteness, and that this must not be, if it is to be of any use. So it is that theology must show how religious language can gear into other language, and must lay bare the points of intersection. Yet in the end, it seems, it cannot be successful in this; for the points of intersection, as I have tried to say, must contain something incomprehensible. In saying this, I am only saying what theologians and other religious people have nearly always said; and this shows, what in any case follows from the nature of the thing, that while one should be a believer to be a theologian, being a believer does not eliminate the incomprehensibility. For if the belief is true, it is a belief in an eternal but personal God with a concern for the world, and it is from this that the incomprehensibility follows.
Having just disqualified myself from becoming a theologian, I shall not pursue the question of the logic of statements of the incarnation. I shall say, however, that I think it is clear that one cannot deal with the difficulties in the summary way which, in the work under discussion, Tertullian takes. It will be recalled that Marcion had said that if God had been incarnated, he would have changed; but change involves losing some attributes and gaining others; and God cannot do this. Tertullian briskly replied that what Marcion had said was true of temporal objects, but God is not a temporal object, and that therefore what Marcion said did not apply. But this is to counter one’s opponent’s move by smashing up the chessboard. For Marcion’s objection, we might say, is a point about the logic of the word ‘change’; we only understand the word ‘change’ in terms of the losing or gaining of temporal properties: so how can we use it of God? So something else must be said; but then, again, if the beliefs are true, nothing can be said that will really do. Tertullian’s paradox is also a paradox of theology: it seems committed to what on its own premisses must be an impossible task.
(7) If it is impossible, what is to be done? Here it may be said that we must have faith; and further that the incomprehensibility I have been discussing is not only a necessary feature of Christian belief but necessary to it, for it is this that provides a place for faith. Tertullian himself I take, on my freewheeling interpretation, to suggest this in the core of his paradox: it is certain, he says, because it is impossible.
We must distinguish here several things that may be meant by having faith. For we may have faith in a person, in the sense that we continue to trust their honesty, good intentions, wisdom, etc., despite perhaps an apparent perversity in their actions. Or we may believe on faith a statement that such-and-such is the case, despite all the evidence being to the contrary. Or we may have faith that such-and-such is what ought to be done, despite the fact that actions and the results of actions involved in carrying out this policy are such as otherwise we should consider wrong. These kinds of faith are, of course, found together: when, for instance, Lenin asked the Bolsheviks before the Revolution to have faith in him, although many of his actions would appear to them inexplicable, he was asking them to believe, among other things, that the aims of the Party would be effected by his policies, although often they seemed to be moving in the opposite direction; and a humanitarian member of the Party had to continue to believe that the Bolshevik state was the right thing to aim at, although murder and misery were involved in doing so. These kinds of faith can be paralleled in the case of religious beliefs; but in the former cases, one thing at least seems to be clear, what it is that is being believed; for if a man had faith in Lenin as leader of the Party, or in the belief that his policies would forward the Revolution, he knew what it was he was believing, although he might be able to give very little in the way of rational grounds for believing it. But it is a stranger request to ask someone by faith to believe something that he does not properly understand; for what is it that he is being asked to believe? Faith might be a way of believing something, as opposed to believing it on evidence; but how could it be a way of stepping from what is understood to what is not understood?
Well, it might be said, faith can be a way of coming to understand something; and here it might be suggested that there is an analogy in the arts. ‘You think this stuff is all nonsense,’ someone might say about a poem; ‘but just believe that the poet is not trying to fool you, take it seriously, and you will come to see what it is about.’ The eighteenth-century hymnologist, in slightly more utilitarian terms, made something like this point when he wrote: ‘O make but trial of his love; Experience will decide How blest are they, and only they, Who in his strength confide.’ But the analogy is not good enough. For here again the initial faith is in a belief that is itself comprehensible: the belief that the poem has a meaning, if one can only find it. But in the case of religious belief it is just the belief itself, and not a prior belief about its comprehensibility, that one has, on the position being discussed, to take on faith, in the hope that afterwards it will become clearwhat it means. Here again I encounter the same difficulty: for if you do not know what it is you are believing on faith, how can you be sure that you are believing anything? And a fortiori how can such belief be the means to something else, viz. coming to understand?
In any case, this is beside the point; for the original argument was that certain religious beliefs must be inherently mysterious and remain so, and that it is the part of faith to accept them. My difficulty is that, if the belief is incomprehensible and necessarily so, one cannot see what is being accepted, on faith or otherwise.
St. Paul (I Cor. 1.20 f.) writes: ‘Where is the wise? Where is the scribe? Where is the disputer of this world? hath not God made foolish the wisdom of this world? For after that in the wisdom of God the world by wisdom knew not God, it pleased God by the foolishness of preaching to save them that believe . . . the foolishness of God is wiser than men’; and in explanation a French commentator, F. Godet, has said: ‘l’evangile n’est pas une sagesse, c’est un salut’—‘the Gospel is not an intellectual system, but a salvation’. It might be objected that my argument has been treating Christian beliefs too much as a ‘sagesse’, and that a system of coherent and comprehensible beliefs is not to the point. This might be put differently by saying that in the later part of this paper I have neglected what I emphasized in the earlier, that religious language is not used only to make statements but for many other purposes as well; that the statements of religious belief are to be understood only as part of a way of life, which includes prayer and religious observance and so on; and it might be said in connection with the previous discussion that what one chooses, when one chooses to believe, is to live in a certain way, in which the statements play a part. This is true; but the statements do play a part, and the beliefs must be there, and that is the point. We may consider again the possible contraction of religious language, the lessening of its scope, which I discussed before, God may cease to be mentioned in explanations of particular physical events, for instance, or in moral discourse, and they will continue as forms of discourse on their own. What would not make sense would be for God to cease to be mentioned in the forms of religious observance or in prayer, for then they would no longer exist at all. But religious observance and prayer stand for nothing, so far as I can see, unless there are also behind them some beliefs about God, some statements about him: for this would indeed be the end needle point of faith, to pray just to the unknown God, in complete ignorance of whether such an activity had any sense in relation to him or not—or rather, in such ignorance, one would have to say ‘it’ rather than ‘him’; and could one even say that? Something must be believed, if religious activities are not just to be whistling in the dark without even the knowledge that what one is whistling is a tune; and something that connects God with the world of men. But such a connection must involve saying something about God that is interpreted not just in terms of other statements about God, but in terms of the life of men. If this is said, it seems that it must either be so like some non-religious statement, as in our crude pseudo-scientific example of the failure of the crops, that it can conflict with such a statement, which would make the central religious belief falsifiable and in no way what was required; or it must be sufficiently a statement about God, as it were, for it to be mysterious, as involving an attempt to express the appearance in, or other connection with, a human situation of the infinite perfection of God. If it is inherently mysterious, then it cannot be explained by reason; but to say that it is to be believed on faith, and not by reason, does not face the difficulty: for the question was not how it should be believed, but what was to be believed. If, then, the Christian faith is true, it must be partly incomprehensible; but if it is partly incomprehensible, it is difficult to see what it is for it to be true.
(8) This is only Tertullian’s paradox with a converse: credibile est quia ineptum; et quia ineptum, non credibile. It follows further, if this is the case, that it is difficult to characterize the difference between belief and unbelief. We can indeed point out that the believer says certain things which the unbeliever does not say; but we want not just this, but to know what it is that the believer believes and the unbeliever does not believe; but this we cannot properly do. But if we cannot adequately characterize the difference between belief and unbelief, we may not be able to characterize the difference between orthodoxy and heresy: for the difference between persons believing different ineptitudes is as obscure as that between those believing one ineptitude and those not believing it. Tertullian, as I mentioned at the beginning, became a heretic.
1 This paper, substantially in its present form, was read in May 1954 to the Oxford University Socratic Club; I should like to express my gratitude to the Chairman of that club and the editor of its publication, the Socratic Digest, for allowing the paper to be printed here.
* This is a reference to Anthony Flew and Alasdair MacIntyre, eds., New Essays in Philosophical Theology (London: SCM Press, 1955), in which Williams’s essay first appeared.— Ed.
2 For a similar argument see Ch. XI below—Editors. [This is a reference to C. B. Martin, “The Perfect Good.”—Ed.]
3 The connection of this with the idea of an immortal soul will be obvious, and is basically important; but it cannot be pursued here.
4 But clearly we cannot properly understand the first part of the paradox unless we understand the second.
TWO
Metaphysical Arguments
Metaphysicians do not just assert their positions. They attempt to support them by argument, and to give proofs of their conclusions. Some consideration of these proofs must form part of any enquiry into the nature of metaphysics; for it is the attempt to give a proof for his conclusion, to show by logical argument that such-and-such must be so, that chiefly distinguishes the philosophical metaphysician from the mystic, the moralist and others who express or try to express a comprehensive view of how things are or ought to be.
It may well be that the thorough-going metaphysician does not often, psychologically speaking, start with his proofs; he may start rather with a view of the world, and find subsequently demonstrations that articulate his thoughts in the required shape. In this sense, the arguments that he gives may be described as rationalizations—so long as this description does not mean that the arguments are therefore summarily to be dismissed as baseless, invalid or contemptible. Part of the word ‘rationalization’ is after all the word ‘rational’, and it is in virtue of their logical structure, their claims to logical validity, that metaphysical theories are marked off from mere intuitive and unformulated insights into reality.
However, the resemblance of metaphysical theories to rationalizations in the psychoanalytical sense does go rather deeper than this, and it may make one wonder whether the arguments that the metaphysician produces really matter. To some recent writers, metaphysical theories and arguments have seemed to be just symptoms of a kind of intellectual neurosis or ‘mental cramp’1—the metaphysician is a man with an idee fixe which he projects on the world in the form of an ambitious and distorted theory. So, just as it is no good reasoning with a neurotic, it is no good arguing with a metaphysician—what one must do, in both cases, is to cure them. Hence there goes with this view of metaphysics a corresponding view of the proper duty of philosophy. The philosopher should play psychoanalyst to the tortured and theory-ridden metaphysician and, bypassing the arguments in which he rationalizes his worries, use analytic technique to get to the roots of the worries themselves.
In its extremer forms, this view seems to be a wild exaggeration. What it rightly emphasizes is that many important metaphysical arguments are not the sort of arguments that can just be accepted as valid or rejected as invalid by certain and generally agreed rules, and that their value or their faults are likely to lie deeper, in some central concept or idea which the metaphysician is trying to articulate through them. The weakness of this therapeutic view, if taken a long way, is that there seems to be no reason why it should not be taken all the way, so that metaphysics comes to be regarded, not just as like a neurosis, but as being indeed a particular sort of neurosis. If it were so regarded, of course, the use of philosophy or philosophical analysis to cure it would be a frivolous pursuit—what would be needed would be real psychoanalysis. One cannot seriously believe that metaphysics is as non-rational as this, or that philosophers should really hand over to the clinicians. The analysis that is required is philosophical, not psychological, and what requires it is not the metaphysician himself but his arguments; which should be taken seriously as rational attempts to prove a point of view.
Of course, metaphysicians vary in the extent to which they try to give proofs of what they say; and in the extent to which the proofs that are given are precisely and rigorously expressed; and in the extent to which the proofs, however expressed, form an essential part of the thought, and are not just there for decoration. To take two comparable British metaphysicians, for instance, there is a marked difference between McTaggart and Bradley: while McTaggart seeks knock-down forms of proof and hard coal-like knobs of argument, Bradley tentatively adumbrates. Yet allowing for all these differences, there is in practically any Western metaphysician of importance a core of argument, an attempt to support his position or raise his questions by a movement from premisses to conclusion.
All theorists employ arguments and make inferences, for all are concerned to get from one place to another, to move from a set of premisses or collection of facts to a conclusion. But, equally notoriously, not all theorists make the same kind of inferences, and a movement from premisses to conclusion can be made according to very different sorts of rules. Logicians, who have been concerned to examine, classify and formalize the different types of inference, have divided them by a basic distinction into two broadly different classes—inductive and deductive inferences. Deductive inferences are such that if you accept the premisses, you must accept the conclusion, or else contradict yourself—the conclusion follows with rigorous logical necessity from what implies it. Such are the arguments, for instance, of mathematicians. Inductive arguments, on the other hand, have no such absolute rigour; one who accepted the premisses would not contradict himself if he refused to accept the conclusion, although he might look pretty silly. Most practical inferences of everyday life are of this type: thus if a man arrives from personal experience at the conclusion that it is always unwise to play cards with strangers on race trains, he is making an inductive step.
This example points to one further important feature of inductive arguments. The man who arrives at this conclusion is generalizing—he is saying something to the effect: ‘Seven times I’ve been asked to play, and seven times they’ve tried to swindle me—so probably next time, or any other time, I’m asked, it will be the same’. His argument so far is very sound, but of course he may be wrong in his conclusion; it is always possible that the next card-playing stranger may be honest. This is a general feature of inductive arguments. Just because it is their function to lead from some matter of fact already accepted to some wider, or at least different, assertion, their conclusions are always in a sense only probable. An inductive inference is empirical, and it is always conceivable that its conclusion should turn out to be untrue, however carefully it has been considered.
In the case of deductive arguments the situation is more complicated. Deductive arguments can have conclusions that are necessary and certain—such are the conclusions of mathematical arguments. But they will be so only if the premisses are certain as well, just because a deductive argument gives you no more in the conclusion than what is already tied up or implied in the premisses. If the premisses are only probable, then so will the conclusion be. The immediate point for the present discussion, however, is that inductive arguments can lead only to empirical and probable results.
What is the relation of metaphysical arguments to these two sorts of argument? An enquiry into this relation should at least help us to see what a metaphysical argument is not, and may help us to see something of what it is. It is clear, first, that metaphysicians do not characteristically make straightforward inductive inferences: they do not say things of the form ‘such-and-such is true in these instances, so it is probably always true’. It would be absurd, for instance, to suppose that a metaphysician would reach the conclusion ‘men have freewill’ by an argument like ‘all men we have observed have freewill, so men in general do’ as one might argue ‘all the men we have observed have eyebrows, so men in general do’. The a priori quality of a metaphysical conclusion, its necessity, by itself makes such a procedure inappropriate: there could be no need of that kind of support from experience.
Yet it must be said that some arguments that metaphysicians have employed do look remarkably like inductive inferences. Such, for example, is the simplest form of the theological argument from design, once well known under the name of ‘Paley’s watch’. Paley’s form of it was just this: ‘If we found by chance a watch or other piece of intricate mechanism we should infer that it had been made by someone. But all around us we do find intricate pieces of natural mechanism, and the processes of the universe are seen to move together in complex relations; we should therefore infer that these too have a Maker.’ There are some general difficulties about an argument from analogy of this type; but the immediate point is that it does seem just to be a kind of inductive argument. Paley’s reasoning is simply this: ‘wherever in the past we have found intricate mechanisms we have found a maker, so in this case, too, we can infer one’. But by being an inductive argument it seems too weak for its purpose. For, taken by itself, it can lead only to an inductive type of conclusion; and so the statement of the existence of a God, to which it is supposed to lead, will have the status only of a quasi-scientific hypothesis; and for any such inductive hypothesis, as we have seen, the opposite involves no contradiction, and is logically possible. So one who from this type of argument accepted the existence of God would have to admit that it was at least possible that God did not exist after all. But in general one who believed in God would not admit that it was in any way possible that God did not exist; he would insist that the statement of God’s existence must have some sort of absolute necessity. Thus Paley’s watch, if it is to be called a metaphysical argument at all, does not seem to be a characteristic one, nor yet a characteristic argument for the existence of God. It is only, as it were, a super-scientific inference.
Another way of saying that the metaphysician does not use inductive arguments is to point out that in metaphysical conclusions the notion of probability plays no part. As we have seen, it is a characteristic of inductive inferences that the word ‘probably’ can always slip into them. But the metaphysician does not offer his conclusions as being probably so; he argues that they must be so. Here again, we do meet what look like exceptions to this rule. In the earlier writings of Bertrand Russell, for instance, we find him saying things like this: ‘there are arguments that try to show that the external world does not exist, but since these arguments are not conclusive, and we have a natural tendency to believe that the external world does exist, we are probably safer in going on thinking that it does’. Professor Broad and others have written in a similar vein, as if weighing the probability of one metaphysical thesis against another.
I should like to make two points about this type of example. First, I think there certainly is, or has been, a way of doing philosophy that tried to assimilate it to the natural sciences, and hence regarded its conclusions in the light of probabilities. Some philosophers in this century, impressed by the achievements of the sciences and depressed by traditional metaphysics, sought to apply scientific methods inside philosophy itself, and the results did include what look like metaphysical conclusions presented with an air of inductive probability. I think, however, that if these arguments are closely examined, they can be found not to be straightforward inductive arguments, as Paley’s perhaps was; the language of theory and probability is little more than a dressing for a philosophical conceptual argument. Moreover, these philosophers are not typical metaphysicians; they themselves, I suspect, might have denied that what they were doing was metaphysics.
Second, there may be another reason, quite different from the last, why Russell, for instance, should qualify metaphysical conclusions with terms like ‘probably’. We have already seen one reason why the conclusion of an argument should be thought to be only probable: that is, just that the argument is an inductive one, and a philosopher may want to mark the empirical nature of any inductive argument by inserting ‘probably’ into it. If this is what Russell meant, then certainly his argument is an inductive one. But this is only one reason why the word ‘probably’ should occur in an argument, and there are others. Another, and very familiar, reason is that the premisses of the argument are themselves only probable, in the quite ordinary sense in which, for instance, it is (at best) only probable that the favourite will win the 2.30 at tomorrow’s races. Of course, if my premisses are only probable, then any conclusion I draw from them, even in deductive argument, will be only probable. As we noticed before, you get no more out of deduction than you put in at the beginning. Thus, if someone thinks that the favourite will probably win the 2.30, he can infer, validly if uninterestingly, that probably no other horse will; but he will get no conclusion that is itself certain, since his premisses already are no more than probable. Here we have a reason why the word ‘probably’ should occur even in deductive arguments. But again, if we look back at Russell’s argument, it is not of this pattern; his premisses—e.g. that we believe in an external world—are not in themselves dubious, as forecasts about tomorrow’s races are.
Still, there is yet another way in which ‘probably’ can come into an argument, and this may shed more light on Russell’s. In considering an argument, we may be concerned not so much with the question of whether the premisses and the conclusion are true or false, certain or probable, as with the question of whether the conclusion follows from the premisses—that is, we may just want to know whether the argument is valid. Strictly speaking, there are no degrees of validity: the conclusion either follows from the premisses or it does not, and there is no middle way. It makes no sense to say that a conclusion ‘more or less’ or ‘just about’ follows. Yet one often meets the situation in which one is not sure whether a given argument is valid. The premisses may be complicated or unclearly expressed, the chain of reasoning subtle, and so on, and one may be in genuine doubt whether the conclusion does follow or not. In such cases, one may express one’s doubts by saying that the conclusion ‘perhaps’ or ‘probably’ follows from the premisses.
This sort of doubt, and hence this sort of ‘probably’, can come in, of course, with any sort of argument, inductive or deductive: a piece of mathematics, for instance, may be so complicated and so little self-evident that the best one can say, pending a lot of further investigation, is that the conclusion is probably reached by valid argument. Russell’s argument, and some other metaphysical arguments that involve the notion of probability, may be of this last type. The notion of probability comes into them not because the philosopher thinks that either his conclusion or his premisses are inherently dubious, but because he is doubtful about the connection between them—he is not sure whether his conclusion in fact follows. Such doubts, as we have seen, can arise with any sort of argument; and the fact that a philosopher does not commit himself to saying more than that his conclusion perhaps follows, does not by itself show what sort of conclusion he is reaching, or by what sort of argument.
Anyway, metaphysical arguments do not seem to be characteristically inductive. Are they then deductive?
Deduction seems a better candidate for the metaphysician’s professional tool, for deductive arguments can at least lead to conclusions of necessity, which are what he wants. It is commonly said that metaphysicians seek to deduce the nature of reality or some such thing; and so the impression may be given that the metaphysician’s is a wholly deductive enterprise. This impression seems to get support from the great systems that some metaphysicians have constructed, which claim to show deductive relations between features of reality.
But the idea that the metaphysical activity consists just of making deductions in a system neglects a more fundamental question. Every deductive movement must be made from one place to another: one needs both premisses and conclusion. So in a chain or system of deductions there must be something at the beginning from which the whole series of reasoning starts. In a formal logical system what one has at the beginning are axioms; these are, relative to that system, unquestionable. They are not themselves derived in the system—there is nothing to derive them from. It is possible to have a number of purely formal systems, each with its own axioms, and for particular purposes one can take one’s choice. But the metaphysician is not concerned to give us a choice. He wants to make a series of statements that will both have content and be necessarily true. But if his conclusions are, as he wishes, to be inescapable, and he is deducing the conclusions ultimately from axioms, then the axioms must be inescapable as well—inferences, unlike divers, do not gain in weight as they get nearer the bottom. But the axioms cannot themselves be proved in the system; so the metaphysician must have some other method of supporting his axioms, outside the system. He will try to show that one has to accept his axioms, for only so can he show that one has to accept his conclusions. The weapon he uses to try to make one accept the axioms is in the strongest sense the metaphysical argument.
The rationalist system-builders of the seventeenth century tried in their different ways to find axioms for their systems which would be inescapable; but their method was on the whole to look for axioms which needed no support of any kind, which were self-evidently true. So their metaphysical argument at this point is rather an appeal to propositions which need no argument at all. Thus Descartes, for instance, by his procedure of systematic doubt, whittled away the truths he believed in until he arrived at the apparently indubitable truth ‘I am doubting’, from which he took an immediate step to ‘I exist’. Whether he regarded this step as purely deductive is to me unclear; at any rate, the indubitability of ‘I am doubting’ seemed to him to be established by the pure light of reason.
But not all system-builders use methods as simple as this to provide their axioms. And not all metaphysicians are, in this most ambitious sense, system-builders. Our argument has shown why there is no need for them to be. For if a metaphysical argument can be used to compel one to accept a statement which is then going to be used as the axiom of a system, it can also be used to make one accept the statement even if it is not going to be used as an axiom. Even metaphysicians not engaged in comprehensive system-building will try to show by constructive argument that such and such (which on the whole you didn’t expect) must be so; or, very frequently, by destructive argument, that so and so (which on the whole you did expect) can’t be so. I shall in a moment try to say something about the interrelation of these in a typical case.
In contrasting, up to this point, arguments used by metaphysicians with inductive and with deductive arguments, I have spoken as if there were one definite sort of argument that is metaphysical. I think in fact there is no one thing that is a metaphysical argument, just as there is no one thing that is a metaphysical statement. This does not mean, however, that absolutely no general remarks can be made about them; only that such general remarks will serve to characterize these arguments in outline rather than to state some one essential property of them. One essential property of them, however, can be and has been stated: that they are not the same as deductive or inductive arguments. For some philosophers, indeed, such as the so-called logical positivists, this is quite enough; all metaphysical arguments and statements are by them lumped together and dismissed as meaningless. But this skeletal unity tells us nothing about metaphysics; it is only the uniformity of all before the final leveller. The approach of these collectively anti-metaphysical philosophers is a kind of philosophical parallel to the attitude of a fanatically militarist person who divides all men into two classes only, combatants and non-combatants. Even from the military point of view, such a division would have its disadvantages: among non-combatants, for instance, it fails to distinguish between the medically unfit and the conscientious objectors. A metaphysician, in relation to the positivist criterion of meaning, is more like a conscientious objector than like an invalid; it is his whole purpose to do something other than what the positivist wants him to do. And just as there are different kinds of conscientious objector, so there are different types of metaphysician and of metaphysical argument. Understanding can only be gained by taking individual cases.
Within the limits of this chapter it is possible to look at only one example of metaphysical argument in more detail. It has the overwhelming disadvantage of being only one example; but it is such a central and recurrent one that I hope it may yield some general lessons as well.
The stage is set for the argument I am going to consider by the facts of perceptual illusion. All around us we see objects which we recognize as being of certain sorts—trees, tables, people and so on. Occasionally, in the business of recognizing things, we are deceived, and take something that we see for something which in fact it isn’t. Thus an old boot in the dusk might be taken for a small cat. Into this setting the philosopher steps. He may be concerned with any of a number of questions, such as ‘What do we really know?’; ‘How much reliance can be placed on perception as a source of knowledge?’; ‘What really exists?’; and so on. But whatever his particular question, his reasoning from the situation of perceptual illusion may well go something like this. ‘You were deceived when you took that boot for a cat. Since you were deceived, there can have been no intrinsic difference between the experience you had at the moment of seeing what was in fact a boot in the dusk and the experience you could have had in really seeing a cat at that moment. The difference, after all, came out later—when you had a closer look, made a noise, or whatever it was. Clearly there can be no intrinsic difference between the two experiences, for if there were, you could have told the difference, and would not have taken the one thing for the other. So what was this experience you had? Clearly not that of seeing a cat, for there was no cat to be seen, but equally clearly the experience you had wasn’t just that of seeing an old boot, either. For we have already agreed that it must have been the same experience as you could have had in really seeing a cat, for otherwise you couldn’t have mistaken the boot for a cat; and if you could have had this experience in really seeing a cat, the experience can’t just be that of really seeing a boot; for when you really see a cat you don’t really see a boot. So the experience you have in both cases must be something neutral between really seeing a cat and really seeing a boot—it is something common to both and less than either. Moreover’ (this philosopher might continue) ‘the having of visual experience must be more basic than the seeing of real objects; for one can have visual experiences without in fact seeing the appropriate, or indeed any, sort of object, but we cannot see an object without having visual experiences.’
So runs the argument from illusion in one of its many forms. It contains both a destructive and a constructive movement; both are typical of metaphysical argument. The destructive movement consists of showing that something we should naturally say if asked to reflect on perception—that is, that we just see objects—is false. It may be said that there is nothing very surprising about this, and that anyone who said that we always, whenever we see anything, see a material object, would obviously be wrong; but that nevertheless we sometimes see material objects. But the destructive movement is stronger than this. The metaphysician does not in fact claim that there is no difference between being deceived and not being deceived; his argument is just that the difference is not where you expected it to be. For the argument purports to show that by reflection on the cases of illusion we can come to see that the cases of genuine perception as well are different from what we thought; that in these, too, the visual experience of the observer—which, the metaphysician will go on to argue, is private to the observer—must play a part.
To say this, however, is already to have started the constructive movement of the argument. It is characteristic of metaphysical arguments that the method of destruction already points to what is to take the place of the things destroyed. Hence it is that what is in one sense the same argument—an argument, at any rate, generated by the same facts of experience—can appear in different forms in different philosophers to suit their several purposes. The form in which I have presented the argument from illusion (and some particular form had to be chosen) is in fact one that can lay the foundations for an empiricist metaphysic using the notion of an ‘idea’ or a ‘sensation’.
But the same argument can be used for ends quite different from those of the empiricist metaphysician. Plato, for instance, accepted something like the first stage of the argument, and reasoned from this that our beliefs about the material world must be personal, fleeting and unstable. He added the premisses that true knowledge must be of the unchanging and stable, and that we can up to a point have knowledge, and reached the conclusion that there must be a world of unchanging things, the world of Forms. What he and the empiricists have in common is the use of the argument to destroy a world taken for granted and to substitute something else for it—in his case, a world of Forms, in theirs a succession of experiences from which objects have in some way to be inferred or constructed. Here we see a prime characteristic of metaphysical argument—its use to establish propositions of existence or non-existence. ‘The world of Forms is the world of genuine existence’; ‘the ultimate constituents of the world are sense-data’: these are (very different) metaphysical statements a main prop of which is the argument we have been examining.
How is this argument related to the distinction between inductive and deductive arguments? Clearly it is not just inductive: the empiricist metaphysician, for instance, is not just saying ‘there are illusions, so probably objects don’t exist and individual experiences do’. Yet he is making a movement beyond what he started with. By examining the concept of perceptual illusion, he arrives at a general conclusion about perception as such; a conclusion which is to be attacked, not by the production of any straightforward empirical counter-examples, but by an enquiry into his concepts, in particular the rather dubious concept of ‘an experience’.
‘Well’, someone might say, ‘all we have in this argument is a contingent fact and a set of deductions. The deductions are made from the concept of a perceptual illusion; the contingent fact is that the concept has application—that is, we are sometimes deceived.’ But this would be a complete misunderstanding. For neither is the supposed contingent fact just a contingent fact, nor are the supposed deductions just deductions. When the metaphysician says, with a disingenuous air of factual simplicity, ‘We are sometimes deceived, and take one thing for another’, he is not just stating a contingent fact, something that might well be otherwise. All he actually needs for his argument is the logical possibility of misrecognition, the existence of such a concept; and, very roughly, contained in the concept of recognition is the possibility of misrecognition. So long as we have the concept of recognizing things, we must also have that of failing to recognize them. Of course, we might perhaps have neither concept; but what our perception would then seem to be is totally obscure. In the relation of recognition and similar concepts to our experience lies a huge philosophical problem. Again, the deductions are not just deductions. If they were, there could scarcely be the disagreement there is with the conclusion; and, again, the metaphysician has acquired from somewhere en route a concept with which he did not start out, that of ‘an experience’.
Yet the introduction of this concept is not just gratuitous. It seems to be somehow implied in what is already said, to be demanded by the facts as they stand, and one principal aim of the metaphysician’s argument is to display the facts so as to show where the demand comes. The purpose of the argument is not just to deduce a conclusion from the facts. It is rather to show that the account of those facts, when we reflect on them, has a hole in it, a hole which is exactly fitted by the metaphysician’s special concept. This concept may be one, like that of ‘an experience’, which exists already in a rough form in our ordinary language, and which the metaphysician takes up, dignifies and refines into a principle of explanation. Alternatively, if he is a very thorough-going metaphysician, the concepts he uses in this way may be much more technical and remote from ordinary thinking, like Leibniz’s ‘monads’ or Kant’s ‘noumenal objects’.
The greatness of a metaphysician, it seems to me, is to be determined by three considerations: how arbitrary his special concepts are, how much they explain, and how much they distort our ordinary thinking. These considerations are not, of course, independent—they are bound up together like the design requirements of an aeroplane, where conflicting demands such as minimum weight, maximum capacity and the requirements of safety have to be reconciled by expert designers. The designer of genius gets as near as possible to having the best of all worlds, and so does the metaphysical genius. His concepts will explain a lot, by revealing important analogies between kinds of experience and thought which superficially seem widely different. These analogies must be real ones, and not the product of forced or over-distorting assimilations; and they must not be arbitrary, in the further sense that one must be led to recognize them, and with them the demand for the metaphysician’s explanatory concepts, by clear and cogent argument.
But it is the argument that concerns us here, rather than the features of the metaphysician’s enterprise when it is completed. Any account of such arguments in a few words is bound to be a caricature, but their standard features can be summarized like this. The metaphysician feels an inconsistency or difficulty or incompleteness in what we naturally tend to think about some feature of our experience, or rather in what seems to be presupposed by what we so think. In resolving this, he will try to show that some concept on which we rely is secondary to, or presupposed by, some other concept which he has introduced or extended from elsewhere. This concept of his may have a special place in the answer to the problem in question (like the empiricists’ use of ‘experience’), or he may use it widely elsewhere (like Plato’s Forms) to solve other problems; the more widely he uses it elsewhere, the more systematic will his philosophy be.
The compulsiveness of his argument will come from his starting with concepts and features of experience which, it seems, must be there if we are to think about our experience at all. His attempt to show that some concept involves a difficulty, or is presupposed by some other concept, will often issue in statements of existence or non-existence. Yet his assertions of existence or non-existence, unlike assertions of either empirical or mathematical existence, are in a sense only comparative. For all metaphysicians agree that appearance, those features of the world which are metaphysically shown to be unreal, must eventually find some place in the account of things as they really are. We saw this before in the empiricist’s preservation, in a different place, of the ordinary distinction between illusion and genuine perception. Even McTaggart’s famous demonstration of the unreality of time (which is both philosophically spectacular and very hard to refute) is preparatory to an account of what it is that really does exist and presents itself to us confusedly as the passage of time. Hence it is that some have seen the metaphysician’s activity as primarily one of reallocation: the extension of some favoured concept to a primary place in the account of things at the expense of more familiar concepts.
There is truth in this; yet the choice of such a concept, and the point of its application, is not just arbitrary—and we are left with the problem of why some work so much better than others. Metaphysical arguments are like trees. Their exact position, and their shape, are to a certain extent matters of preference: the metaphysician can choose where exactly to plant them, and how to trim them. But he cannot choose whether they will grow or not; some spots on the conceptual landscape are more fertile than others. If with the positivist axe we chop the trees down, they grow again. If with the Wittgensteinian spade we start digging up the roots, we shall, fascinatedly, go on and on. For even if we dig up one set of roots, there will be, if it was a stout tree, many others. Perhaps digging is the proper philosophical activity at this time—certainly mere pride in having grown a tree larger than anyone else’s is no longer enough. But there was something that justified such pride—the knowledge that the metaphysician’s green fingers had found the spot where acorns could grow. What spurs on the philosophical digger is the desire to know more. What makes metaphysical trees grow? Why from some features of our experience rather than others do metaphysical arguments spring up? The answer to that question would be the ultimate metaphysical answer.
1 This phrase, and the underlying idea, come from Wittgenstein. The most thorough-going exponent of the theory is John Wisdom—see his collection of articles, Philosophy and Psychoanalysis, published by Blackwell.
THREE
Pleasure and Belief
We can be as pleased by what we only believe to be the case and is not, as by what we know to be the case. Thus I may be pleased because (as I suppose) I have inherited a fortune, when I have not. This fact deserves consideration, in particular because it raises the question of the relation of pleasure to its objects; it is with this question that this paper will be principally concerned.
If anyone is tempted to think that the object of my pleasure—what I am pleased by, or at—is the cause of my pleasure, this type of case should discourage him. For the object of the pleasure in this case seems to be an inheritance, but this, since it does not exist, cannot be a cause (as it used to be said, non Pentium non sunt effectus). Yet the cause of the pleasure cannot be something else quite different from the supposed inheritance. For one thing, if I am persuaded that I have not in fact inherited a fortune, my pleasure will disappear and so must have been connected with at least my previous belief in the inheritance. Moreover, in speaking retrospectively of the pleasure, I shall say that I was pleased because I believed that I had inherited a fortune; or something of this kind.
Hence, the only resort of a casual account of pleasure and its objects will be to say that the cause of my pleasure was my belief in the inheritance. Yet this account in its turn raises difficulties. First, if my belief in the inheritance was the cause of my pleasure, it must have been so in virtue of some law connecting such beliefs with pleasure. But what law? Evidently the belief in an inheritance is not the cause of any pleasure, but, at best, of pleasure at an inheritance; yet it is this last notion that the causal account was supposed to explain. However, it may be replied to this that there is no need to introduce this notion into the causal law: it will be enough to say that belief in an inheritance is among the possible causes of pleasure, pleasure itself being a state of feeling (for instance), which is much the same whatever the cause. So that when we say of someone “he is pleased because he believes he has inherited a fortune”, what we mean is “he is experiencing pleasure, and the cause of this is his belief that he has inherited a fortune”.
It would follow from this view that it was always the belief that caused the pleasure, even in those cases in which the thing I said I was pleased at really existed. For if not, the statement “I am pleased because I have inherited a fortune” would express a causal hypothesis different from, and incompatible with, the hypothesis expressed by the statement “I am pleased because I believe that I have inherited a fortune”. But it is evident that at the time of believing in the inheritance, I could have no grounds whatever for preferring the second of these hypotheses to the first, since it is logically impossible for me to distinguish between what (as I believe) is the case, and what I believe to be the case. Hence there will be two incompatible hypotheses about my pleasure which in principle I shall not be able to distinguish. But it is clear that my retrospective description of the situation as my “being pleased because I believed . . .”, and anyone else’s description of it in these terms, are just based on my sincerely thinking or saying at the time “I am pleased because I have . . .”; thus it appears that a necessary condition of the assertion of the true hypothesis would be my previous belief in or assertion of a false one, and this is absurd.
Hence the causal account must hold that it is always my belief that is the cause, or at least the proximate cause, of my pleasure: and that the statement “I am pleased because I have inherited a fortune” must be taken to mean “I am pleased because I believe I have inherited a fortune”. This is equally implausible, however. For first, it still looks, from the previous argument, extremely doubtful whether I am in a position to arrive at the correct hypothesis, and distinguish it from rivals—at the very least, it seems that it would be a necessary condition of so doing that I had engaged in philosophical reflection; second, it is impossible to see what evidence I could have for the hypothesis, or how I would set about collecting evidence; third, since the statement in question expresses, on this view, a causal hypothesis, it would be corrigible, and it would make sense to say that I had just been mistaken in thinking that it was a certain belief that caused my pleasure; but in general no sense can be attached to this. In fact, something like this incorrigibility extends even to the formulation which does not include an explicit reference to my beliefs. There are, indeed, ways in which I may be mistaken about, or ignorant of, the objects of my pleasure, and it will be one aim of this paper to investigate them; but I cannot be mistaken in saying “I am pleased because I have inherited a fortune” in the same way as I can in saying, for instance, “I have a stomach-ache because I ate some bad fruit”.
Thus the object of my pleasure—what I am pleased at, by, or (in this sense) because of—is not to be taken as a cause: nor can my belief in so-and- so be made to function as the cause of my pleasure at so-and-so.
In fact, the whole idea of a man’s beliefs’ being a cause in such cases is a fiction, aided, though not inspired, by a misunderstanding of the form of words “he was pleased because he believed . . .”. Now this form of words, and perhaps a similar misunderstanding, occur also in another connexion—that of a man’s having mistaken grounds for an action. There are other obvious similarities between the two cases. Statements of the form “he did it because he believed that p” are, like the comparable statements about pleasure, ultimately based on the man’s own statement, taken to be sincere, of the form “I did it because p”; and statements of the latter form are, again, not open to the charge of being straightforwardly mistaken. It is perhaps worth noticing that there are languages which, in both connexions, do not employ anything like the misleading formula “because he believed” at all, but perform the same function merely by the mood of a verb.
Thus in these respects, at least, there is some analogy between pleasure and its objects on the one hand, and actions and their grounds, on the other. But this analogy will not take us very far. For pleasure, like many other states with which similar difficulties arise, such as fear, is not an action, but more like, at least, a “passion” or something that happens to us. But even if this is denied, the analogy will not work out. Even if we agreed with Aristotle1 and possibly Prof. Ryle2 that pleasure in the standard case consists in or accompanies zestful activity, it would have to be the activity, if anything, that constituted the object of the pleasure, for it is this that I take pleasure in; but if it is the activity that constitutes the object of the pleasure, this will not be constituted by the grounds of the activity, if any; so that even in this case, the relation of pleasure to its object will not have been explained as the relation of actions to their grounds.
In fact, in many cases it is impossible to discover any activity, the zestful engagement in which constitutes the pleasure. The man who is pleased because he believes he has inherited a fortune may indeed enjoy such “activities” as imagining his improved style of life, planning expensive holidays, envisaging the gratitude of persons to whom he will be generous, etc. But even if we supposed, what seems to be false, that such “activities” were the logically necessary concomitant of being pleased at a supposed inheritance, their zestful performance cannot in fact constitute the pleasure in question. For a man can enjoy such activities (as day-dreaming) without believing that these things will come about. He will enjoy the activities quite differently, and much more, and will give a quite different answer to the question “why are you pleased?” if he really believes that these things will come about, and just because he so believes. Hence enjoying such activities is not a sufficient condition of being pleased because I believe I have inherited a fortune, and it does nothing to explain the peculiarities of the latter. So the only “activity” we are left with as the object of this sort of pleasure is the “activity” of believing in these future events, itself; and this will not do, for we give sense to “he takes pleasure in believing it” only where the man does not (really) believe it, or at least has made himself do so, or has refused to be unpersuaded, and these are quite different matters. An activity in which I can take pleasure is surely something in which I can engage or indulge, which I can take up or abandon, and none of these things can in general be done with belief.
In such cases, pleasure certainly cannot consist in any zestful activity. Thus, for more than one reason, the slight epistemological analogy between the grounds of action and the objects of pleasure cannot be directly pursued. How then is the connexion between pleasure and its objects to be characterized?
Let us consider the notion of “pointing to”. This will lead us, I am afraid, a long way round, but eventually back to pleasure. It is a familiar point that the mere fact that my finger may be pointing to something, in the sense that a line drawn from it meets that thing, does not mean that I am pointing to that thing.
It is a characteristic of the sense of “pointing to” in which I point to things, that if asked what I am pointing to, I should be able to give an answer.
Further, that subject to certain qualifications I cannot be mistaken or ignorant, i.e., it makes no sense to say that I am mistaken or ignorant, about what I am pointing to.
Further, that I can point to things of various categories. Consider what can come after “look at . . .”—that thing, the size of it, the shape of it, the number of ants down there, what he is doing, the colour of the sky, the speed he is going, etc.
Last, that by pointing, I can draw someone’s attention to these various things; and that the purpose of pointing is usually, if not always, to do just this.
Now it is not true to say without qualification that I cannot be mistaken or ignorant about what I am pointing to. For I can be mistaken, or at least something goes wrong with my account of what I am pointing to, in at least the following cases:—
(a) About the past, I may remember that I pointed, but misremember (or, less usually, completely forget) what it was that I pointed to. This is obvious and uninteresting.
(b) I may point to x, but mistakenly say that I am pointing to y, because I mistakenly believe that x is y. The first case of this is that in which the mistake does not matter, because it was not as y that I was pointing to x. The commonest case of this is where I want to point to the attitude, qualities, etc., of x, and identify x as y. (“Look at the wonderful colour of those hibiscus flowers.”—“What? There are no hibiscus flowers.”—“Oh, I meant the colour of that bush over there, whatever it is.”)
(c) This case is like case (b), except that here the mistake matters, because it is as y that I am pointing to x. (“Look! The Queen!”—“It is not the Queen.”—“Oh . . .”) Here it is true that I pointed to something, and something of which I could have given another description (e.g., “that lady who just walked in”), but here the pointing is, as it were, withdrawn; and attention drawn to the thing pro tanto lapses.
(d) I may point to x which does not exist at all, as Macbeth might have pointed to the dagger. Here the description given (“a dagger”) has to be withdrawn, but in its place a different kind of description can be given (“I was pointing to the dagger I thought was there”). It is noteworthy that “the dagger which I thought was there” is not a description referring to an image, or any similar private thing. It is a description whose place of application is in the external world—for the dagger I thought was there is (if I may be allowed the expression) just the one that is not really there.
So much for mistakes that may arise with my descriptions of what I am pointing to, or drawing someone’s attention to. If we consider now the correlative situation, of my having my attention drawn to something by somebody, we see that matters are different since of course I may be just mistaken about what he is trying to draw my attention to. Or the boot may be on the other foot, and I may know better than he about the application of the descriptions he gives, i.e., may be able to correct his descriptions already. But now consider the situation of my having my attention drawn to something, not by a person pointing, but by the thing itself; I may have my attention drawn by and to any of the sorts of things to which I or someone else might point. Now here I cannot make the sort of mistake that arises when someone else does the pointing and I misunderstand him, for that is related to the description he would give, and that does not arise in the present case. Nor can I correct myself, as I can correct him, on the spot; though I may go on to correct myself, or if I share the object of attention with others by pointing, the situation is as described above. The situation is rather as with my own pointing; and here it is important that having my attention drawn to something is often a preliminary to my pointing to it, and that the description I would give in pointing to it is often the description under which, as it were, the thing draws my attention to itself. Having my attention drawn to something of course differs from pointing to it inasmuch as the latter is an action and the former is more like something that happens to me. This difference is important; but it is more important that the difference does not affect the status of the descriptions that occur in the two cases. The descriptions or identifications, misdescriptions or misidentifications, I could give of what drew my attention are just those that I might give if I were to draw your attention to whatever the thing is: and just as with pointing the description I give may in one of these ways go wrong, and yet it makes no sense to say that I was mistaken in supposing myself to be pointing to this rather than that, so when I characterise what drew my attention, I may misdescribe it, and yet it makes no sense to say that I was mistaken in thinking that it was this that drew my attention rather than that.
There is one peculiar sort of case that arises in connexion with “having my attention drawn” and cannot arise with “pointing”, which may be added to the present list of examples, although it is not strictly speaking a case of mistake or ignorance at all:
(e) My attention may be drawn to some feature which I already know to be illusory, but which is striking and worth attention nevertheless. Thus, after I have taken mescaline, my attention may be drawn by the unusual appearance of my carpet. Here I know that I am under an illusion, so of course will not try to point to this extraordinary appearance.
One further case concerns ignorance:
(f) It may be that x has drawn my attention, but that I do not know exactly what it is about x that has drawn my attention.
There is no analogy for this last case, either, in pointing. There must, of course, be some determinacy about what draws my attention, if only because to have my attention drawn is to have it drawn to one thing rather than another; and under the description so proffered I shall be able to point (unless of course the case is otherwise peculiar, by being e.g., of type (e)). It makes no sense to say that I do not know what about it I am pointing to, but it does make sense to say that I do not know what about it drew my attention. There is nothing surprising about this difference:since my purpose in pointing is to draw someone’s attention to x, the description I furnish of x will be one which I suppose will effect this purpose, and one that is indeterminate through ignorance would be unsuitable. It is of course true that I can point to, and draw someone’s attention to, x (under some description) just because I do not know what (under some other, usually more specific, description) it is: “look at that bird—what is it?” or “that shape in the corner!” This is a partial analogue to having my attention drawn to something and not knowing precisely to what feature of it—but only a partial analogue. For in the pointing case, if I point to x, and ask what it is, any further description I go on to give of it in an attempt to answer the question is in no logically different position from anyone else’s suggestion. But the situation is different with the thing that drew my attention. If I go on to try to decide what it was about the thing that drew my attention, it seems that, although others may make suggestions and have theories on the subject, it is for me to decide whether their suggestions are correct. If I do sincerely and wholeheartedly decide that it was a particular feature of this thing that drew my attention to it—e.g., a certain resemblance, even if only a fancied resemblance, of this lady’s hat to a familiar landmark—it is doubtful what sense it makes to say that I was mistaken in this diagnosis. The fancied resemblance may turn out to be only fanciful; but I cannot be mistaken in saying that it was this fancied resemblance that drew my attention to the shape of her hat; or that it was the shape that drew my attention to the hat; or that it was the hat that drew my attention to her. At most, I might, in certain very complicated contexts, be said to be deceiving myself; for instance, an inhibited person might succeed in deceiving himself into thinking that what drew his attention to a certain girl was the unusual material of her dress rather than its provocative cut. But such cases are perhaps rare.
How it is that one can come to know on reflection that it was this feature that drew one’s attention to something, I find an obscure question. That such conclusions are not reached by empirical inference, and that one is not establishing an ordinary type of causal proposition, is evident.
Before we return to the direct discussion of pleasure, one further point must be made about “having my attention drawn to”. Two importantly different sorts of case have not been distinguished. The first is that in which my attention is drawn to something because I am expecting or looking for something, and the thing which draws my attention does so as a supposed candidate for being the object of my expectation or search. In such cases, obviously, my attention to the object will lapse if it turns out not to be the object in question, and if it is the object in question it will become the object of attention of a different kind, viz., of whatever sort of interest motivated the expectation or search. Second, something can attract my attention as being surprising or (rather differently) intriguing. In this case, attention will lapse if the object turns out not to be a surprising thing at all; or if it is, but surprise is dissipated by explanation; or if, without explaining it, I just get bored with it or distracted by something else. The most important difference between these two sorts of case is that in the first the object draws my attention as supposedly matching a description (in the broadest sense) with which I am already prepared—a description which would figure in an account of what I was already searching for, expecting, etc. In the second case, the description is not already prepared; the object merely introduces itself, arriving without invitation. It follows from this difference that the situations (a)–(f) described above do not all arise equally with both types of case; for instance, (f) does not arise with the first sort of case at all.
To return, now, to the case of pleasure. It is obvious that there is a close analogy between the cases (a)–(f) in connexion with attention, and similar cases in connexion with pleasure. There is in fact a parallel for each case, on the following lines:
(a) First, and again uninterestingly, I may remember some occasion in the past on which I was pleased, but misremember or completely forget what I was pleased at. This is perhaps rare; but less so with the converse case of misery: I may remember the miseries of childhood or adolescence, but forget, because I would now regard as trivial, their objects. This case is not to be taken to include the situation in which present pleasure is based on misremembering—this will be considered later.
(b) I may be pleased at x, but say that I am pleased at y because I falsely believe that x is y; but this does not matter, because x’s being y is no element in my pleasure. Thus, I may be pleased by this picture, as a picture, and say that I am pleased by this Giorgione, when the picture is not a Giorgione.
(c) More drastically, I may take pleasure in, or be pleased by, x which I mistakenly think is y, where x’s supposedly being y is the basis of my pleasure. Thus, I may be pleased by this supposed Giorgione as being a Giorgione.
(d) I may be pleased at something that does not exist at all, for instance my supposed inheritance of a fortune.
Common to cases (c) and (d) is the feature that the discovery of the truth means the end of pleasure—at least, of that pleasure. The distinction between case (c) and case (d) is often merely a matter of expression, and with many cases it would be ludicrously scholastic to try to force them into one class or the other. For instance, I might be very pleased by the arrival at my party of a gentleman whom I took to be a certain distinguished author. This could naturally take its place in class (c); but some one might argue, very strictly, that what I was pleased at was the (supposed) occurrence of a certain event, viz., the arrival of this author, and that this event has not happened, i.e., does not exist, so that the case belongs to class (d). It would surely be frivolous to insist on a decision between these two accounts of the situation.
However, a rather more serious point does perhaps emerge here; for it may be objected that the frivolity of an argument on this last question shows a weakness or unclarity in speaking in this way of the objects of pleasure at all. Often the most natural formulation will be to say that I am pleased because . . .: e.g., that I am pleased because (as I suppose) this author has arrived, rather than that I am pleased at the (supposed) arrival of this author. Alternatively, the language of activity may be appropriate: I might be taking pleasure in looking at the supposed Giorgione rather than in the supposed Giorgione. Some genuine differences are marked by these different formulations, and the sort of distinction I have been drawing needs refinement to deal with them. But the language of objects of pleasure which I am discussing here is sometimes not reducible to the language of “because”, and is rarely not a possible alternative to it; and, as I tried to argue at the beginning of this paper, the language of “because” is a cause of philosophical puzzlement—which the other formulation, properly understood, may help to solve. The language of activity, again, seems more independent, and in some cases not to be reducible to the language of objects; unless it is that in those cases the activity is itself the object of pleasure in the same sense. But, as was argued in the previous discussion of the case of the inheritance, it is also true that the language of objects or of “because” cannot be reduced in every case to the language of activity. I shall not further discuss here the language of activity, which I suspect to be more closely related to the concept of enjoyment than to that of pleasure; in any case, our present concern is with the problems of belief and knowledge in relation to pleasure, and these less notably arise with activities. In so far as they do, it may be that some of the present account can be adapted to deal with them. (Thus it seems true to say that if I am engaged in an activity or performing an action, there is one sense in which I must know what I am doing; but this only means that there is some description of what I am doing under which I know that I am doing it, and there may be many others which I might offer of what I am doing which do not in fact apply. It might be under one of these latter descriptions that I was enjoying doing what I was doing (case (c)), or alternatively the mis description might not matter because it was not as this that the action or activity was being enjoyed (case (b)); and so on.
The analogy between the cases discussed in connexion with pointing and attention, and similar cases with pleasure, does not stop here. Similar analogies can be found for the cases (e) and (f):
(e) I may be pleased by some feature which I know to be illusory, but which pleases me nevertheless. Thus, owing to my myopia, I may find a strident picture agreeably muted; having a high fever, I may find the sour drink pleasantly sweet; after mescalin, I may find my old curtains an exciting riot of colour.
(f) As x may draw my attention, and yet I may not know what it was about x that drew my attention, so I may be pleased by x, and yet not know what it is about x that I find pleasing. Again, with pleasure, as with attention, one finds in such cases the puzzling phenomenon of my apparently being able to discover by reflection what it was.
Thus there does seem to be an analogy between the cases of mistake, ignorance, and illusion that can arise with objects that draw my attention, and such cases that arise with the objects of pleasure. Before leaving the detailed consideration of the analogy however, there is one feature of it that needs further investigation. One notable way in which mistakes can affect pleasure is that my pleasure may be founded on false beliefs about the past or the future. Thus I may be pleased because I suppose the remark I recently overheard to have been a compliment about me, though it was not; or I may be pleased because I think that I am going to see a certain person tomorrow, and, as it turns out, I do not. The case of the supposed inheritance, previously mentioned, is a kind of amalgam of the two, since it involves both the belief that somebody has made a will in my favour, and the belief that money will be arriving; though it is presumably the latter belief that is the more closely connected with the pleasure. Now, with the inheritance as we have seen, the language of objects can indeed be used; and this case was assigned to a certain class in the analogy, class (d), of objects which I think exist but do not.
But the situation is more complicated than this suggests. First, there is a certain asymmetry between the past and the future in this respect. In the matter of the future, we must distinguish between the pleasures of anticipation and the pleasures of the event. I can of course have the former without the latter happening at all: either because the event does not happen, or because the event, though happening, turns out not to be pleasurable. These last two possibilities come to much the same thing, so far as the “baselessness” of the pleasures of anticipation is concerned; for the pleasures of anticipation consist in the anticipation of pleasure.
In the matter of the past, it is in general true, correspondingly, that the pleasure of memory consists in the memory of pleasure. The “pleasure of memory” here is not to be confused, of course, with the pleasure of reminiscence, or even of recall; with these, the pleasure is taken in a present “activity”, viz., recalling or reminiscing about some past events which in themselves need not have been particularly pleasant. We are interested in the “pleasure of memory” in a different sense, of the continuation or revival of the pleasure associated with some past event. But even in this connexion, we must distinguish two quite different ways in which mistakes may arise. The first is the case in which the pleasure is continued or revived by the correct memory of a pleasure originally based on a mistake—as in the case of the supposed compliment. This presents no special difficulty: it is merely, as it were, the inheritance of a mistake. But there is another case, in which, through mistake of memory, I either “remember” a pleasant event which did not happen and which I did not at the supposed time of happening believe to be happening, ormisremember as pleasant an event which did happen but was found by me at the time unpleasant; in either case, I may feel present pleasure at the supposed past event. This is not the inheritance of a mistake, but a mistake of inheritance. Of these, the latter is more like the case of a mistake about the future.
Now it is not entirely clear how the language of objects is to be taken in such cases, nor what the analogy with attention will be. The cases can, as was suggested, be crammed into class (d), thus corresponding to those in which my attention is drawn to the actually non-existent. But this is not very illuminating. However, by extending the notion of attention a little, some better analogies can be found. Where I merely continue or revive a past pleasure originally based on a mistake, this is like having my attention drawn to something and continuing to concentrate on it when the object itself, or rather what I took to be this object, has been removed. More difficult is the case of present pleasure based on mere misremembering; yet here there is the analogy of someone’s directing his attention to some event he supposes to have happened, or this event, or perhaps its memory, forcing itself on his attention. With the future, I can indeed have my attention directed to a supposed future event, as I do in expectation or waiting, which (as we noticed above) may be the preliminary to my having my attention drawn to the thing’s actual appearance. This, though the analogy is not perfect, is something like the pleasure of anticipation followed by the pleasure of the event. The point needs further investigation, but I should like to suggest that the distinction between the “invited” and the “uninvited” objects of attention has other applications in connexion with the concept of pleasure. For instance, it is connected with the distinction, first drawn by Plato,7 between those pleasures that consist in the satisfaction of a desire, and those that do not.
In the course of this discussion we have traced some analogies between, on the one hand, the relation of pleasure to its objects, and, on the other hand, the relation of attention to its objects. It can now be suggested that these analogies are not merely analogies: they exist because attention is involved in pleasure, and because the relation of pleasure to its objects is the relation of attention to its objects. If I am pleased by something, my attention is, to that extent, drawn to it; and the more I am pleased by it, the more my attention is absorbed in it. It may be remarked here that there are perhaps cases of pleasure that have no object; where one merely feels full of well-being. In fact, the word “pleasure” seems very rarely to be used in such cases, but rather “cheerfulness”, “contentment”, etc.; or, if it is, the “pleasure” is given a pseudo-object (“pleased with life”). But if they are cases of pleasure, it is noteworthy that they are also cases in which characteristically my attention is not directed to anything in particular.
This is not to say, of course, that being pleased by something just is attending to it, that finding something pleasant just is having my attention drawn to it and held by it, that the pleasures of anticipation just are anticipation; attention can just as well be directed to or held by the unpleasant. It is rather that pleasure is one mode or species of attention.
This connexion between pleasure and attention has been noticed before, e.g., by Prof. Ryle.8 But Ryle does not discuss what the relation is of attention to its objects, in particular to objects which are mistakenly believed to exist. I have tried to show that the concept of attention is itself sufficiently complex in these respects to illuminate the corresponding complexities of the concept of pleasure. Now it may fairly be asked how much this explains; for, it may be said, since not all attention is attention to the pleasant, the actual relation of pleasure to attention remains still to be explained. This is true—it does. But at least the relation of pleasure to its objects may be somewhat clearer if it is shown that this relation is that of attention to its objects, and if this relation is given some explanation. The last I have tried, very sketchily, to do, in suggesting that the idea of attending to a thing can be based on, though not straightforwardly derived from, the simpler notion of pointing to a thing. In particular, I hope that the introduction of the notion of something’s drawing my attention to itself may help to explain how it is that, although pleasure is something that happens to me rather than something I do, nevertheless the characterization of its objects shares epistemological features with the characterization of the objects of pointing, which is something I do rather than something that happens to me. These categories of “something I do”and “something that happens to me” are, of course, much too crude; but it is significant that they are much too crude for the concepts both of pleasure and of attention, and in very much the same ways. For instance, it sometimes happens that my attention is unexpectedly drawn to something because in fact I have been subconsciously looking for it, and very much the same thing can occur with pleasure.
The type of relation to an object that I have been trying to investigate in the cases of pleasure and attention is one of those that some philosophers have investigated under the title of “intentionality”; and though I have deliberately avoided the word, I hope the present remarks may suggest a line for clarifying this obscure notion. Some of these philosophers (perhaps Husserl) seem to have held that each type of “state of consciousness” was in the end unanalysable. If not only the relation of attention to its objects, but that of pleasure to attention, could be clarified, it might be found that this view was too pessimistic.
1 Eth. Nic. 1174a 13 seq.
2 “Pleasure” P.A.S. Supp. Vol. XXVIII (1954), pp. 135. seq. I am unclear whether Ryle does subscribe to this view; some remarks in this article suggest that he does not, but concentration on the case of activity plays a large part in his arguments against the view that pleasure can be a feeling.
3 Though we should not underestimate our capacities in this direction; cf. Price “Belief and Will”, P.A.S. Supp. Vol. XXVIII (1954), Inaugural Address.
4 The point is made several times by Wittgenstein in the Philosophical Investigations.
5 This may be related to a point made by Miss G. E. M. Anscombe about certain bodily movements: cf. Intention (Blackwell, 1957) para. 8. Her phrase “cause known without observation” does not fit the present case; but then I am not sure that it is a very happy description of the case she is discussing, either.
6 Cf. Plato, Philebus 39d seq.
7 Philebus 50b seq.
8 Op. cit. pp. 139 seq.; for pleasure as one mode of attention, see p. 142.
FOUR
Knowledge and Reasons
One aim of this paper is to make some suggestions about the role of reasons in knowledge. The other is to sketch an approach to the nature of knowledge which will put that question into a correct perspective. That sketch will indeed be sketchy, and most of what I shall say schematic. My aim is to put the main issues into what seems to me the right overall shape.
1. PROPOSITIONAL AND PRACTICAL KNOWLEDGE
I shall be concerned only with what I shall call propositional knowledge, knowledge whose paradigmatic expression in language-users is the confident assertion of truths, and where the claim that it is knowledge that is being expressed involves as a necessary condition that what is asserted is true. This contrasts with practical knowledge, of which the paradigmatic expression is the skilful and successful performance of some task. (Success is not, however, related to practical knowledge as truth is to propositional knowledge: without truth of the proposition there is no propositional knowledge, but practical knowledge can be present and in action, though robbed of success through extrinsic causes.)
The distinction is not easy to formulate, and admits borderline cases. It is, however, both genuine and ineliminable, neither sort of knowledge being reducible to the other; this I shall assume here without argument. I shall make two further remarks about the distinction, both relevant to what follows. First, I use the term propositional, and not the term hallowed by history for this contrast, theoretical, because the latter too readily imports the notion of the systematic. Some propositional knowledge is indeed theoretical, in the sense of being general, systematically arranged, having a structure of laws, etc.; but much propositional knowledge is not. The idea that what contrasts with practice is in that sense theory, can generate serious confusion (present, I think, in the reflections of Michael Oakeshott in his Rationalism in Politics and elsewhere). Second, I do not think that the distinction is very happily labelled, as by Ryle, as a distinction between knowing that and knowing how. These labels are of course all right if merely labels. But their use can encourage the neglect of several facts, some of them important. For example, not every ascription of propositional knowledge need, or even can, take as it stands the form “A knows that. . . .” “Know” importantly governs indirect questions (as in, notably, “A knows whether . . .”). The philosophical relevance of this fact will come up in (2) below. On the other hand “A knows how . . .” can represent propositional knowledge (“A knows how a nuclear power station works”); what represents practical knowledge is rather “A knows how to. . . .” But then there is no peculiarity with “how”: practical knowledge can equally be represented by “A knows when to . . . , what to . . .” etc. Following from that, some cases of “A knows that . . .” can represent practical knowledge, if they further involve “to” (or equivalent construction) and (something like) a demonstrative: “A knows that this is the time to add the salt,” “A knows that the one to use is the one that looks like this” etc.
I should perhaps add that I do not regard peculiar properties of the English language as very illuminating for the concept of knowledge; but they can serve to remind one of the misleading possibilities of labels themselves drawn from that language.
2. “KNOWING THAT” AND THE EXAMINER'S SITUATION
Philosophers who have addressed themselves to the third-personal issue (and have not, like Descartes, concentrated on “What do I know?”—a concentration which raises its own problems) have tended to stick to the question of the truth-conditions of “A knows that p.” That is to say, they have looked for conditions sufficient for giving an affirmative answer to the question “does A know that p ?”. In actual life, one very natural implication of asking that question is that the speaker himself knows that p, and is asking whether A does. One immediate effect of taking as central that question, which has that implication, is to push into the background an important class of cases: the cases, namely, where the speaker does not know how things stand with regard to p, and wants to find someone who does—a situation in which he could ask “who knows whether p?” or “does A know whether p?”.We have already a concentration which helps us to forget a banal and important fact: knowers are, for others, sources of information.
Even in sticking to “A knows that p,” however, the concentration tends to go in one only of several possible directions. The one favoured is that in which the point of the question is whether A’s cognitive relation to the truth that p is adequate: in particular, the case where A is admittedly convinced of the truth that p, and the question is whether that conviction is adequately based. This situation, and more generally the situation in which informed questioners are concerned with A’s credentials with regard to a piece of knowledge, we might call the examiner’s situation. It is far from typical in practice. For instance, another and frequent situation with respect to the question “does A know that p?” is that in which the point of the question is to ask whether the information that p has got out to A, or got round to him: one of our interests in knowledge is where it has got to. Where such is our interest, the stress on credentials (the relevance of which to the examiner’s situation is self-explanatory) is less to the fore. When my interest is whether A has come to know something which, for instance, it would be better for me if he did not know, the central question is whether the information has got to him, and he believes it, and less whether the reasons with which A would support his belief are strong or adequate reasons. Yet even in such a case, there is a contrast with A’s merely having come to believe the proposition in question, a contrast embedded in the thought that the information has “got to” him. If he has come to know, then at least it is the case that he has not merely guessed—there must be a route by which the information has come to him, and the fact that what he believes is true must have contributed in some appropriate way to his having come to believe it. In this last consideration, obscure though it is, we shall see a central condition on the concept of knowledge.
Let us return to the cases in which our interest in another’s possession of knowledge concerns a matter about which we lack knowledge: our concern (unlike the examiner’s) is to find out, not so much about this person, as about the matter in hand. If “p” represents some sentence which may be used to make a statement of fact, let “whp” represent in general direct and (with any necessary grammatical modification) indirect questions that may be formed out of that sentence. The simplest example of an indirect question, available in every case, is “whether p.” But there are of course many other and various possibilities; if “p” mentions some time (“the train leaves at 15.00 hrs”) “whp” can be a “when”-question (“when does the train leave?” “. . . when the train leaves”); if “p” mentions a place, “wh-p” can be a “where”-question, etc. Now the following statements all seem to me to be true:
a. In many standard situations, all that is necessary for it to be the case that A knows whp—besides his actually being right in this case (see (b) below)—are such things as that A is almost always right about matters of this kind, because e.g., in the matter of the train, he has learned up the time-table; or that we know, what perhaps A himself does not know, that A has come by his beliefs on this subject by reliable means. Thus it may be that A has come by his beliefs from having been told by B, and we know that B is a reliable authority on these matters, though A himself may not, never (for instance) having reflected on that question.
b. If conditions of this kind are satisfied, then all that is further necessary for it to be the case that A knows whp is that the beliefs he has with regard to the question be true, i.e. that he actually be right. (I shall assume throughout this paper that belief, involving a fair degree of conviction, is a necessary condition of knowledge. I doubt whether that is true without qualification, but the assumption will serve for the present discussion.)
c. If A knows whp, and P is the class of correct answers to the question “wh-p?,” then for some member of P, q, A knows that q. This rather cumbrous formulation is intended to allow for such facts as that if “wh-p?” is a “who”-question—say, of the form “who did X?”—A may know of a certain person under some descriptions that he did X, but not under other descriptions.
If the statements (a)–(c) are all true, then it is possible for A to know that q without its being the case that A can rehearse reasons, or at least adequate reasons, for q. For the sorts of conditions mentioned in (a) do not necessarily imply anything, or anything very substantial, about A’s consciousness of reasons for q, or of his own relation to the truth of q. They are conditions about A, rather than conditions on A; we may call them (to use a phrase I owe to discussion with Mr G. O’Hare) external conditions. If (a)–(c) are true, then the satisfaction of such external conditions can, together with true belief, be sufficient for knowledge.
3. KNOWLEDGE WITHOUT REASONS
One might hope that it would be so. For if we consider the classical tripartite analysis of propositional knowledge, namely that A knows that p if and only if (i) p is true, (ii) A believes that p, (iii) A has good reasons for p, there is a notorious difficulty, that a regress is likely to be generated, and in more than one way.1 For if A’s reason for p is constituted by some other proposition which supports p, then it seems that this in turn must be something that A knows, unless we are to embrace the not very inviting conclusion that the difference between true belief and knowledge is basically the difference between believing one true thing and believing two true things which are connected. Moreover, the fact that this other proposition supports p must itself (it seems) be something that A knows, which generates a further regress.
Some formulations of the third condition (such as Ayer’s “A has the right to be sure” in The Problem of Knowledge) are designed to be general enough to allow of at least some cases in which the appropriate grounding of A’s true belief does not take the form of another proposition which A knows or believes. But the purpose of such attempts has generally been to accommodate some class or classes of propositions which supposedly possess some specially evident or ground-level character: the regress is to be stopped by foundations. Whatever may be said about the foundations of knowledge, I do not believe that they are thus to be brought in, as an answer to this difficulty in relation to the account of what knowledge in general is. Rather, we should acknowledge that if we are speaking in general about knowledge, not only is it not necessary that the knower be able to support or ground his true belief by reference to other propositions, but it is not necessary that he be in any special state with regard to this belief at all, at least at the level of what he can consciously rehearse. What is necessary—and what represents the undoubted fact that knowledge differs from mere true belief—is that one or more of a class of conditions should obtain, which relate the fact that A has this belief to the fact that the belief is true: conditions which can best be summarised by the formula that, given the truth of p, it is no accident that A believes p rather than not-p. This formula is vague and over-generous, but it gets us, I think, on the right line; in particular, in the consideration that the notion of its being “no accident” is basically the same notion as is employed in a causal investigation.
Suppose a spiritualist medium or some such is thought to have clairvoyant powers. She makes claims, of which she is convinced, about the whereabouts of certain objects, or states of affairs elsewhere. Let us suppose that her claims are clear and determinate and, moreover, true. Two questions might now be raised: is it just an accident, extraordinary good luck on her part, that she is right in this series of cases? and—does she know? My thesis is that these are the same question. If we are convinced that it cannot just be luck, that the probability of chance success at this level is vanishingly small, then the question arises of how the success comes about: which is the same question as, how does she know? (The difference in English, that we ask why he believes, but how does he know, a difference remarked by Austin and other philosophers, is indeed indicative of a truth.) Perhaps we shall not be able to find out how it happens: in that case, we shall not be able to tell how she knows. If we are left in that position, we shall not (pro tanto) be led to deny that she knows, any more than we shall deny that the correlation indeed exists, is too good for chance, and demands an explanation. We shall just be left with the admittedly puzzling fact that she does know, but there is an utter obscurity about how she knows.
We may take also a familiar real-life example. Someone in close relations with another may often know how the other feels, what thought has occurred to them, how they are about to react, why they reacted in a certain way. Their grounds for these convictions are often, at the conscious level, virtually non-existent or at least hopelessly unspecific. But if it is true that such a person is usually right—and not, as sometimes, merely passing over the negative instances—then we have little hesitation in ascribing knowledge. In this case, we also have a general idea of how they know: there is an explanatory schema available, which could in principle be further filled in, no doubt, by careful investigation of what they are subconsciously “going on.”
It is worth saying in passing that the existence of such unreasoned knowledge; the existence, further (though this is not the present point), of personal and social knowledge which the subject cannot even adequately express, let alone justify: these things do not stand opposed, in some mystical way, to a rational and scientific picture of what the world is like. That humans can understand the human in ways in which the non-human is not to be understood, does not show that man stands apart from nature, but rather shows something about what kind of system in nature he is. To think, moreover, that unless unreasoned human understanding is magic, it must be possible to replace it with articulate and reasoned procedures in a scientific style, is again a non-sequitur, and in good part a scientistic illusion. To insist on thinking about personal situations in such terms makes, after all, a concrete psychological difference to the thinker, a difference which may perfectly well destroy, without replacing, the knowledge he would otherwise have. The role and importance of the reflective and self-conscious in human affairs is indeed a serious issue, but it is not to be thought of in terms of replacing weather-magic with meteorology.
4. THE DIFFICULTY OF PRODUCING A CRITERION
I claim, then, that it is not a requirement in general on knowledge that the knower be in some special conscious state in relation to his true belief; the requirement rather is that it be no accident, granted the truth of p, that he believe p rather than not-p. But if this is considered as an analysis of knowledge, there is no doubt that it will not serve, since it is too vague and (on natural interpretations) over-generous. For suppose that A, being from Guinea, tells B falsely that he is from Ghana; but (let us fancifully suppose) owing to features of A’s spoken English which are peculiar to Guineans, B takes him to have said “Guinea” when he said “Ghana.” Then B has come truly to believe that A is from Guinea, and (in an obvious sense) it is no accident, relative to A’s being from Guinea, that this has come about; but B can scarcely be said to have acquired knowledge in this way, as opposed (for instance) to a situation in which, familiar with the Guinean accent, he sees through the pretence. Or again, the firm’s accountant, being depressed over personal matters, is influenced by that to give a gloomy picture of the firm’s affairs. The manager is depressed by this account; being disposed, when depressed, to think that everyone else is, he forms the (true) belief that the accountant is. This can hardly count as the acquisition of knowledge, either.
These, and other, cases do seem to be counter-examples to the “no accident” account taken without further restriction as an analysis, since they do seem (unless we covertly assume some unexplained restriction) to satisfy the general condition that the acquisition of the belief was no accident relative to its truth, and yet these are not cases of knowledge. Further investigation may be hoped to provide some appropriate types of restriction, such as those needed to distinguish the passage of a piece of information (in a propositional sense—not in the generalized sense used e.g. in the biological sciences, though that is not irrelevant), from the more general notion of a causal chain with the same proposition at each end of it. In the absence of the required restrictions, I offer the “no accident” clause not as part of an analysis but (as I said before) as a label for a class of conditions, the general requirements on which need to be spelled out with greater precision.
One general requirement indeed is that the route from fact to belief should in general be a truth-producing or truth-preserving route—that beliefs engendered by this kind of process should have a good probability of being true. But that, while correct, does not actually get us very far. For the difficult question remains: at what level of generality of description is a process or kind of process to be determined to have or lack the truth-producing feature? Or—another way of putting it—what is to count as the same, or a different, process? Thus it may be said with regard to the two cases just described, that what is wrong is that the processes of belief-production involved—mishearing in the one case, being influenced by a mood in the other—are not in general truth-producing processes. Well, regarded at this level of generality, they are not. But regarded at a more specific level, with the distinctive features of the cases put in, they are, and the question is why the first and not the second level of description should properly represent our view of the situation.
Very similar problems arise with the characterization of reasons. A fact which, described at one level, constitutes a good reason for believing something (e.g. “being told by Jones, a reliable authority”) will have many other descriptions under which it will appear as a bad reason, or no reason at all (“being told by somebody,” “being told by a man who has never been to Paris”). This unsurprising parallelism between the problems of finding the right application of “no accident,” and the problems of assessing reasons, is one of several grounds for supposing that the sort of difficulty presented by these cases is not one of principle with the “no accident” account, but only demands refinement of it.
5. THE PLACE OF REASONS
None of this is to deny that the possession of reasons plays an important role in the economy of the concept of knowledge. It would be highly paradoxical if there were no such role. But the present account enables us to see the nature and point of that role more clearly than does an account which merely insists on the possession of reasons.
In many cases, it will be highly probable, and in some cases, it will be necessary, that the only way in which a subject could reliably and (relative to the truth) nonaccidentally acquire true beliefs is via the thought of considerations which support the truth-claim, that is to say, via reasons. It is likely to be so with knowledge of matters remote to the subject in space and time; though here it is worth remembering the platitude that we all possess information about the past (and leaving aside the special case of our own pasts) which is rightly accepted as knowledge yet whose credentials lie in no adequate reasons that we can muster for these propositions, but in the “external” fact that we have acquired the information from presumptively reliable sources, which we cannot now, usually, remember. A special sort of requirement for reasons comes into view with propositions of certain logical types. Concerning mathematical propositions, for instance, save of the simplest kind, there is strong pressure behind the Platonic view that the distinction between knowledge and true belief lies in the possession of an aitias logismos, a chain of proof. Plato himself claimed (at least in the Meno) that the point of this demand, and thereby the superiority of knowledge, lay in the greater permanence of beliefs so tied down. It may or may not be psychologically true that such beliefs are more permanent, but it hardly goes to the heart of the matter, which is surely more the point that the access to mathematical truth must necessarily lie through proof, and that therefore the notion of nonaccidental true belief in mathematics essentially involves the notion of mathematical proof (the points which the Platonic model of recollection precisely serves to obscure).
Now I can truly believe a mathematical proposition, which I cannot demonstrate, because I have been authoritatively told that it is true. This would be widely agreed not to constitute knowledge—knowledge, that is, that p, where p is the mathematical proposition. But there is another piece of knowledge that I might well be said to have in these same circumstances—the knowledge that p is a mathematical truth. It will seem paradoxical to take apart in any way knowing that p, and knowing that p is true. But if these two are kept logically tied together, then the line must come between knowing that p is true, and knowing that p is a truth of a given science. To be a truth of a given science is to be, in a special sense, a part of knowledge; and to know that a proposition has that status is to know that it is, by the standards of that science, to be counted as known, as opposed to its being, for instance, a matter merely of plausible conjecture.
This consideration brings us to a last and different sort of connection between knowledge and reasons. So far, I have been discussing knowledge as, in a certain sense and in part, a psychological concept, one to be applied to individuals with respect to their hold on true propositions. But there is such a thing as impersonal knowledge, as when we speak of the state of knowledge in a given field, or of something’s now being known which was not known 20 years ago, or of the structure of a certain molecule not being known though there exist various theories or hypotheses about it.
That there should be radically impersonal knowledge seems, on the face of it, impossible: if p is known, then somebody surely must know it. But this apparent platitude is in conflict with other things we are also disposed to accept, and at least one of them has got to give. Let “Kip” stand for “it is known that p,” in the sense under discussion, and “Kap” stand for “a knows that p.” The apparent platitude is
(1) If Kip, then, for some a, Kap.
The following, further, seems to be plausible:
(2) If Kip and Kiq, then Ki(p & q).
But certainly this is not true:
(3) If Kip and Kiq, then, for some a, Ka(p & q);
If (3) were true, the age of the universal polymath would not be behind us. But (3) is entailed by (1) and (2), since “p & q” will of course be a substitution instance of “p” in (1). I will not explore this problem here, beyond pointing out that we must resist the temptation to defend (1) on the basis of the two assumptions (a) that the logic of “Kip” will be revealed by concentrating just on true assertions of the form “Kip,” (b) that anyone who truly asserts or, at least, who knows, that Kip must himself know that p. Neither is true. A proper understanding of “Kip” will take into account, for instance, questions whether Kip; and as to (b), we have already seen in the mathematical case that it is false.
I have mentioned this problem only to show that the relations between impersonal and personal knowledge are not as simple as may at first appear. Now, impersonal knowledge certainly has a special commitment to reasons. Bodies of knowledge are essentially, if to varying degrees with different subjects, systematic. There is both a pure and an applied reason for this. Pure, because the aim is not just to know but to understand, and in scientific cases at least understanding necessarily implies organization and economy. Applied, because a body of knowledge will only be freely extensible and open to criticism if rationally organized. And there are of course other considerations which support the same point. So knowledge, in this sense, must have reasons. It may, even, have foundations, though that is an open question. What it is an open question of, however, is the philosophy of science; these are different issues from those of epistemology in general, that is to say, the study of knowledge as such, and in particular personal knowledge.
Whatever is to be said about the relations between personal and impersonal knowledge, it is of course true that what is known is fragmentarily known by various persons; the savant has internalised some part of a body of knowledge. Insofar as this is true, his personal knowledge will satisfy the standards of rational organization which are appropriate to a body of knowledge. But we must not take that special case as the clue to the account we should give of the ordinary business of personal knowledge.
1 The difficulty has been well discussed by Gettier: see his article reprinted in Phillips Griffiths, ed., Knowledge and Belief, Oxford 1967; and also Griffiths’ introduction to that book. The present discussion is also indebted to Martin and Deutscher, “Remembering”, Philosophical Review 1966.
FOURTEEN
Political Philosophy and the Analytical Tradition
There was a time, not very long ago, when analytical philosophy had more or less given up on political philosophy. The introductions to successive volumes of Politics, Philosophy and Society expressed anxiety about whether the subject could continue to exist, or amazement that it still did; at least one international symposium had as its title “La philosophie politique, existe-t-elle?” and many others had the same theme. There is no need to stress that that time is now past. I do not intend to spend time myself worrying exactly what philosophy is analytical, nor in encouraging discussion on that unrewarding topic, but I take it that for instance A Theory of Justice is in the analytical tradition, as are Nozick’s Anarchy, State, and Utopia and most contributions to Philosophy and Public Affairs. Clearly, the predicted funeral has been indefinitely postponed.
In part, I take the change to be traceable simply to a law—which is so far as I know exceptionless, but not for all that transparent—that living political philosophy arises only in a context of political urgency. The somnolence of political philosophy was to that extent a phenomenon of the period which prematurely saluted the end of ideology. But if so, this already tells us something about political philosophy’s uneasy relation to the analytical tradition. For political philosophy’s habitual, and it seems ineliminable, dependence on the urgency of political questions which are not in the first place philosophical is of a piece with its insistence, when at all interesting, on being both normative and impure. It is normative at least in the sense that first-order moral and political disagreement with the author can relevantly motivate disagreement with his philosophy, and impure in the sense that materials from nonphilosophical sources—an involvement with history or the social sciences, for instance—are likely to play a more than illustrative part in the argument.
Analytical philosophy at that time wanted, and tried hard, to be neither normative nor impure. The distinction of fact and value (or rather, in this sort of case, of theory and value) supposedly served to segregate the philosophical from the normative, while the companion distinction of analytic and synthetic served to segregate the philosophical from the historical or social-scientific. Granted this program, and granted the hereditary characteristics of political philosophy, analytical philosophy was bound not to do much for it. So explanation of the torpor of political philosophy at that time cannot just settle back on the characteristics of the time; it must, further, explain why political philosophy is peculiarly resistant to being made pure and non-normative, and why analytical philosophy at that point had those negative ambitions.
The first question I shall discuss, rather obliquely, below. The second question I shall not try to answer at all, but I will outline what an answer would have to explain. It is often suggested that the negative ambitions of analytical philosophy followed solely from its acceptance, in strong forms, of the two distinctions which I have mentioned, in particular the fact-value distinction. But this must be wrong. For even granted a sharp distinction between fact and value, one has to add a doctrine about the proper role of philosophy in order to determine that philosophy will concern itself with the one but not the other. This point is well illustrated by the work of one of the modern fathers of the fact-value distinction in analytical philosophy, G. E. Moore. Moore, having announced in Principia Ethica (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1903) the existence of the so-called “naturalistic fallacy” and its consequence that no purely logical process could get one from metaphysical propositions to value judgments, was not at all deterred from giving up much of his book to reports of what, in his view, was good. Of course, granted the naturalistic fallacy, these remarks must be in effect additional to his metaphysical and logical claims, but he does not mind making them. He differs from his successors not in views about the relationship of metaphysics or logic to statements of value, but on whether books written by philosophers should confine themselves to metaphysics and logic.
In part this difference can be traced to a difference about the epistemology of value judgments. There might be some reason, if an obscure one, to suppose that if the discovery of what was good rested, as Moore supposed, on the intuition of non-natural properties, then a philosopher would have some appropriate skill of holding relevant intellectual items in transparent suspension in his mind—a skill not peculiar to philosophy but at least favored by it. But once the later developments of fact-value theory led to non-cognitive accounts of the holding of value judgments, then indeed there was a difficulty about the philosopher’s claim, so far as value judgments are concerned, on anyone’s attention. In particular, the tendency to regard value judgments (or rather, their overt utterance) as primarily protreptic, as seeking to exhort or command their hearers, leaves a special darkness about the relation between the philosopher who says such things and his audience.
There has been a real problem about the relation of the modern moral or political philosopher to his audience, of what claim he has on anyone’s attention, and I shall come back to it, briefly, at the end of this paper—though in a context, I hope, less flatly discouraging than that presented by the sort of view I have just mentioned. But in the present connection, it is important that the limitations on analytical philosophy could not possibly have been imposed merely by the fact-value distinction in itself. They required also a special view of the responsibilities of philosophy. It is important, too, that the limitations on philosophy, and the associated drying-up of political philosophy, were not uniquely encouraged by the belief, no doubt important to many “end of ideology” views, that serious value disagreement was at an end and substantial consensus obtained. On the contrary, it was precisely a sense of the contrast between the plurality of values, and their unresolvable conflict, as opposed to the supposed universality of logic and science, that helped to motivate the fact-value distinction.
The fact-value distinction and how to see it in 3-D. I mentioned the question of why political philosophy could not throw off its hereditary involvement with the normative and the impure and form a pure but productive alliance with the chastely limited ambitions of analytical philosophy. The short answer is that the peculiarly two-dimensional operation of the fact-value distinction as then employed offered all it had to offer about ethics or about value in general, and left nothing interesting to be said about the distinctively political issues. The distinction imposed a contrast between those elements of language which registered the state of the world, and those that expressed policies, principles, or decisions to change it—or at any rate, in another version, affective reactions which related to desires to change it. Many of our most interesting value concepts evidently combined both these functions, serving both to register some complex set of facts and to express an evaluation. But the evaluation had to be logically separable from the facts, or a certain way of describing the world would itself import evaluations. Fact would entail value, and, most basically, a certain kind of freedom which this view demands—that an individual’s values should not be dictated to him by the world—would have been abrogated.
If this were right, then it would follow that nothing of a very interesting philosophical character could be said about these complex value concepts. Philosophy would make its general point about the separateness of the value element, and the question of why the descriptive elements should be grouped together, and how the evaluations related to a broader context of beliefs, would be left to the social sciences and thus, by the purity requirement, definitively outside philosophy. From this point of view, the complex value concept cannot invite the question of how those facts involve those values. That presumably would be a philosophical question, were it possible, but from this perspective it is not possible. No fact involves value. We, or other societies, apply values to some facts; and the questions invited by the complex value concept can only be how, and when, and to what facts we or they apply value, and that is seen as a question for the social sciences. But now the distinctive subject matter of political philosophy must certainly involve complex value concepts, for it is not any old right and wrong, but those imported by lawfulness, or justice, or equality, or liberty, which are its concerns. Hence the two-dimensional fact-value theory could find nothing of interest for political philosophy, and it is not an accident that political philosophy should have preserved its old recalcitrance in that respect.
Nor, equally, that it should remain impure. For if there is to be a philosophical way of doing better respect to the complexity of these value concepts and their relations to a wider background, it will not be one which totally leaves behind the interests of the social sciences, but rather one which cooperates with them. I certainly do not want to try to give here any extensive suggestions about the fact-value distinction and what should happen to it. But it is worth mentioning one possibility which curiously did not attract as much interest from fact-value theorists as it might have done: namely that there is no compulsion to use a given value concept at all. Two-dimensional fact-value theory implied that for any mixed concept C it was always possible to have a concept C′ which had all and only the descriptive content of C but lacked its evaluative force; and that it would be a nonphilosophical question whether C′ had a use. But we can take it as itself a philosophical consideration that C could lose both its identity and its point without its evaluative force; and that its identity, further, can be involved in its relations to a wider range of concepts. By emphasizing this consideration, one might hope to recognize that evaluations can be more intimately bound up with ways of describing the world than the earlier analytical account would allow, so that, for instance, the selection of certain kinds of conduct for evaluation itself makes sense only in terms of a general framework of beliefs; and yet one could at the same time preserve the truth that moral beliefs cannot just be a record of what the world is like, and even, with a certain difference, preserve that ultimate value-freedom which the fact-value theorist wanted.
The concept of sin, for instance, relates in itself fact and value, and relates them in a complex way so that they are not merely external to each other—one could not merely have all those beliefs and abandon those values—but, as modern life reveals, there is no necessity for human beings to use the concept of sin. On this way of looking at it, one can regain the three-dimensional sense that it is in the context of a set of beliefs about the world and society that values have a meaning; one can examine the detailed structure of a set of values of this kind without supposing that it is the only possible one; one can approach the value systems of other times and places with a more realistic and flexible set of categories; and one will need to, and be able to, make better use of the social sciences than to regard them as the repository of the nonphilosophical.
It is only with a certain difference that this preserves the requirement of ultimate value-freedom. The idea that one could, so to speak, withdraw one’s value commitment from a complex value term presumably would mean, if it meant anything, that one had a peculiarly individual kind of freedom; butwith the recognition that values are more deeply incorporated in systems of belief, the freedom in question becomes more ultimate and less available, since the reconstruction of an entire outlook has less the appearance of being to hand. The freedom becomes the freedom of man rather than of men. But it was only the extreme abstraction of the earlier view which gave the impression of anything else. It is interesting that the purest exponent of the earlier kind of analytical view I have been discussing, R. M. Hare, has now moved to a much more normative stance, but it is one, of utilitarian type, which precisely preserves the individualism implicit in the earlier view, and, at the same time, the opinion that substantive complex value concepts are in principle redundant or uninteresting.
Reflexive social understanding. It is possible to see that type of element in analytical philosophy as ideological—not, perhaps, in the sense that its propagation serves an interest, but at least in the sense that its direction and presuppositions are formed in ways not evident from its surface, and perhaps not evident to the writers themselves, and which admit of social explanation. I do not want to discuss the question of which, if any, such explanations are true: they tend in fact to wander between the vague and the anecdotal. But I should like to suggest that at any rate analytical philosophy up to now has been notably ill-equipped among philosophies for considering whether such things might be true, for reflexively raising questions of its own relations to social reality. The extreme abstraction I have already referred to, and the conceptual character of its subject matter, not only in an obvious way set it apart from considerations of this kind, but actually logically exclude them. An epistemological reflexion, in purely conceptual terms, on the status of theses of analytical philosophy is of course available and has taken up only too much attention: but reflexion in concrete historical terms was excluded by the ban on the empirical.
Insofar as the purely conceptual stance helps this immunity to social reflexion, one might hope that a greater openness to the impurities of the social sciences might help. Indeed it might, in an obvious and immediate sense, in that much social science at this moment is obsessed with such issues, and some sociology gives the appearance of having collapsed into pure social epistemology. But if, in general terms, one were to believe that the mere presence of the social sciences were to encourage such reflexion, one would clearly be very optimistic, since some branches of the social sciences, in particular some types of political science, are the very subjects which have most emphatically invited complaints of lacking such reflexive self-criticism. It might be said that that criticism would be avoided if the idea of social understanding were joined to philosophy, since philosophy is essentially reflexive. But it is a marriage broker’s optimism to suppose that the mating of reflexive philosophy with the consciousness of social reality gives reflexive social consciousness: as Bernard Shaw said to the actress, “suppose it has your brains and my looks?” To take a particular example, Winch’s theory of the social sciences blends an openness to anthropological data with a philosophical method; indeed it obviously represents an over-close assimilation of social to conceptual understanding. But it is certainly not better blessed with reflexive consciousness than was either analytical philosophy or positivist social science.
There is in fact no mechanical way of ensuring that political and moral philosophers are more sensitive to these issues—as they should be, although the sensitivity should be prepared to take the form, on occasion, of looking the difficulty in the face and passing on (just as one’s recognition of other traditions in philosophy should often take the form of looking them in the face and getting on with something one actually believes in). The lesson I draw from that is that the education of political philosophers should include such epistemological materials as will help them to get some measure of the varying claims of the sociology of knowledge. As it has been said that metaphysicians and philosophers of language should not be verificationists, but should have a verificationist conscience, so political philosophers should have a readiness to be embarrassed by the possibility of reflexion on the formation and direction of their views.
Bit-by-bit or systematic? The question of how systematic philosophy should be, and the related, if not identical, question of how far it should consist of theories, is one that has been the subject of much disagreement within analytical philosophy; with, extremely roughly, a British tradition of piecemeal improvisation (with the conspicuous exception of Russell) being opposed to a theory-directed Teutono-American tradition. The present state of this question largely corresponds to the present political and economic fortunes of these two groupings, and it can hardly be doubted that the more systematic and theory-based approach has, in central areas of philosophy, simply won. In the philosophy of language, notably, the point has established itself that an isolated distinction or analysis lacks both sense and point: Austin’s professed view, that one collects linguistic distinctions like types of beetles, can be seen to be absurd about linguistic distinctions, and not very clever about beetles.
In a theory of meaning such as Davidson’s, as also in Quine’s, the notion of theory itself plays a quite central role: for the notion of meaning is introduced (insofar as it is introduced—the point will do just as well with regard to the surrogates for meaning in these theories) essentially in terms of what conditions are associated with a given expression by the theory which optimally fits all observed utterances. Now what is being referred to here is of course an empirical theory, a theory which a linguist might form about a given language which he was trying to understand, but the point has further ramifications into philosophy itself: for the philosopher will try systematically to give analyses or elucidations of expressions of our own language which will be of a type to fit in, at least, with such an empirical theory, and without some such constraint the choice between possible analyses or elucidations of expressions becomes indeterminate and pointless. This is a strong example, but the same point can be argued to hold more generally; it is only in terms of what could be said about a lot of cases, or expressions, or areas, that the choice of what to say about this case becomes determinate. It is the absence of such constraints that makes a lot of Wittgensteinian philosophy so empty. The original view was that what made the choice of an elucidation or a philosophical remark determinately appropriate was a concern, and what makes a lot of Wittgenstein’s later work impressive is the presence of a recognizable such concern—his own. But many of his followers seem to be addressing postulated or type-concerns, which represent at best only a very weak constraint on what is in fact very inexplicit theory.
The systematic constraints on the philosophy of language hold for other very general areas of philosophy: metaphysics, theory of knowledge, philosophy of mind; in some part, because they do hold for the philosophy of language. Without some such constraints—and I do not want to exaggerate the degree to which they are yet clear or agreed—it is hard to see why one philosophical remark should be more relevant than another, or what might count as an explanation. In this sense, vaguely as I have pointed to it, I should want to claim that philosophy should be systematic. Moral and political philosophy are also parts of philosophy. But it does not follow from that that we should necessarily have systematic moral and political philosophy; or at least, if it does follow, it follows only in the weak sense, which I accept, that these branches of philosophy should be responsive to systematic demands from elsewhere: for one thing, the grammar of moral and political sentences—literal grammar, not Wittgensteinian—is the same as that of other sentences. What does not follow is that moral and political philosophy should have their own systems, or that to supply system should be a primary demand on philosophers in these areas.
The reason is that an important aim, and certain consequence, of systematizing in these areas is to reduce or eliminate conflict among our ideas and sentiments; and before we set out doing that, and while we are doing it, we should reflect on the significance of conflict. Conflict in our moral sentiments and beliefs is, first, a historically, socially, and probably psychologically conditioned phenomenon, the product of such things as pluralistic societies and rapid cultural change as well as, perhaps, more generally distributed psychological needs which tend to conflict. We can, to some extent, understand why we have conflicting sentiments, but that does not mean, or should not mean, that we therefore withdraw our loyalty from them. Second, it is not true that any situation in which there is no such conflict is better than one in which there is, or even—what is perhaps more plausible—that conflict reduction is an aim which always has a very strong priority. In the case of belief-conflict and of explanatory theories, conflict-reduction is an undoubted aim: whether it be for the pragmatist reason, that conflict-elimination itself defines the aim of the explanatory endeavor, or for the realist reason that conflicting beliefs cannot both, in some more substantial sense, be true. But the articulation of our moral sentiments does not necessarily obey these constraints, and to demand that they be schooled by the requirement of system is to alter our moral perception of the world, not just to make it in some incontestable sense more rational.
This is what makes Rawls’ model so misleading, which assimilates moral “intuitions” to the intuitions of a native speaker such as are the input to a linguistic theory. It is not merely that more is involved in schooling the moral responses, in “reflective equilibrium,” to theory than there is in finally writing off some marginal utterances as deviant. It is that the role of theory is different. It is the role of linguistic theory to explain and predict acceptable utterances, and it is the theory for doing that. But in the case of moral sentiments, a Rawlsian theory, that is to say a set of principles or moral notions which unifies our moral opinions and in that sense predicts the reflective reaction to a possible or imaginary case, is not alone in the field: for we can understand equally an external theory, e.g. of social explanation, which predicts that no one set of such principles or notions will do the job. Thus we may have systematically conflicting sentiments, for instance, about the value of character and the value of particular actions and intentions; or of the value of particular, non-moral, sentiments and the value of moral, impersonal sentiments of justice. We can feel the force of both utilitarian and anti-utilitarian arguments. Moreover, we can see perhaps why we have these conflicting sentiments; and if so, we cannot agree that there must be a unified theory which “predicts” the response to various situations, in the Rawlsian way, or else that some of our responses are to be jettisoned.
There are in fact two different points to be made here. First, the mere fact of the possibility of external explanation of value-conflict means that the Rawlsian question parallel to the question in the philosophy of language, “What unified and systematic set of principles will ‘predict’ these reactions?” is a question which need not necessarily have an answer. The unity of a language—even the unity of my language—is given in relation to the explanatory theory itself: whereas the unity of my values or sentiments is not so given, and in relation to the external explanations of how I came by them, they may emerge as not unified. (A man between two cultures is not like an effective speaker of a Creole language.)
The second point is that when these conflicts become clear to a man, there is still a question of to what extent and how he should reduce them. Thus many of us now have two kinds of sentiments about questions of people being killed: utilitarian sentiments on the one hand, and on the other sentiments which have a complex articulation but which involve such notions as that with regard to who is to get killed, no choice is better than choice, and that if a choice has to be made, structural considerations (such as fewer rather than more, the already dying rather than those not already dying, etc.) take precedence. This conjunction of sentiments leads to conflict; and utilitarians in particular (a) argue for a rationalization of our outlook and (b) argue for its rationalization in the utilitarian direction, diagnosing the second set of sentiments as the residue of some earlier non-utilitarian outlook. But there are at least three levels at which this pressure for rationalization can be resisted.
First—and this is one which utilitarians themselves can recognize—the consequences involved in the actual social realization may be more extensive and more harmful than expected. Second, at a psychological level, the rationalized values may be harder to live with and to handle. And third—removed now from utilitarian concerns—it may be the case that these sentiments are metaphysically involved with more of our view of what people are than appears on the surface. That requires exploration, and that exploration requires patience with our apparent irrationalities. And perhaps more than patience—at least, indefinite patience.
It is an open, and I think difficult, question how far it is an unquestionable ideal that even ultimately, moral responses should be harmoniously integrated, in ways in which ours now are for the most part certainly not. (A related, and equally difficult, question is how far an analogous demand holds on first-personal rationality: it is certainly a far from self-evident demand, made by Rawls, Nagel, and many other writers, that one should rationally plan for one’s life as a whole, as though it were a given rectangle to be optimally filled in.) But whatever the answer to those questions, it is certain that such an ideal end is not to be taken as realized in the deep structure of our existing sentiments, nor to be approached by the direct route of setting out to school them in accordance with system. First they have to be understood, which, while it must be done in the context of a systematic philosophy in general, is likely to be a patient and untidy business.
It may be said that morality requires action, and action requires decision—one hopes, on rational principles. It is true that we have to act, but it is only the view that action exhausts the point and content of moral thought that could lead anyone to think that that is the end of this matter. What follow rather are such familiar facts as that sometimes we act, and necessarily act, with less than 100 percent conviction; or again—less familiar, this, than the well-known liberal lack of conviction, and perhaps more invigorating—that it is possible to act with 100 percent conviction on one occasion while quite conscious that on another occasion, only obscurely different from that first one, conviction might not have arrived. The relations between action, conviction, and rationality constitute an area in which moral philosophy, the philosophy of mind, and metaphysics most significantly meet.
But however that may be, politics, it may reasonably be said, is a different matter: for while individual persons can to varying extents go round with conflicting moral sentiments, there is a demand of rational consistency and principle in public positions (quite apart from what is legally enacted). There is obvious truth in this; but among many further things that should be said about it are two which, in terms of a program for political philosophy, qualify its effect. First, the requirement of consistency in principle which obtains on a series of public decisions by an enduring authority in a rational state (idealized as that may be), or on the program of one party (even more idealized though that may be), obviously does not extend to political life as a whole, which precisely can embody not only conflicts of interests, and of straightforwardly opposed principles, but of conflicting values, and of conflicting interpretations of the same values (consider here the conflicts of equality of opportunity with equality of esteem; or of justice as equality with justice as entitlement). The philosopher’s thoughts do not have to be directed to solving these differences; he may do his best work, in fact, in sharpening them, by making it clear in what ways both have a foot in our sentiments. This may not be, in the short term at least, an altogether helpful activity, but it can be a good one.
Second, even insofar as a philosopher’s efforts are directed to assisting rationality in political practice, they may helpfully take the form of providing structures in which it can be recognized how much conflict of value that process can and should absorb. In particular I have in mind here the philosophical study of decision theory, with particular emphasis on structures more complex than the linear, often utilitarian, models, with an emphasis on direct comparability of values, which have often prevailed. It is admitted that actual structures of decision in political bodies lie a long way from these idealizations; but it is also probable that very simple models of what practical rationality is can feed into and affect decision processes. A combination of a mastery of the appropriate formal skills and a steady sense of the existence of genuinely competing and only partially reconcilable goods—something which distinguishes the work of Amartya Sen in this field—is something which political philosophy needs to provide.
History. I am not going to say anything, except by implication, about genuine historical understanding. I suppose, for reasons which are obvious and would be tedious to rehearse, that genuine historical understanding is of the first importance in the understanding of politics and political thought; that diachronic distancing is one very important form of the distancing we need to secure from our own society; and that that gains another importance when the society is an ancestor of our own. Further, it seems to me that to read Plato only as in last week’s Mind is to lose an important part of reading Plato.
About what genuine historical understanding of a text is, understanding of what it meant, I agree with Quentin Skinner that if it is recoverable at all, it must be in the kind of terms which he has detailed, of those contemporary expectations in terms of which a communicative intention could be realized. Moreover, it is clear beyond doubt that the fundamental sense of the question, asked of a historical text, “What does it mean?” is “What did it mean?”
However, there is another sort of question, which can be expressed in such forms as “What does it mean to me?” or “What do I get out of it?” This question, I would rather say, is not so much asked of the text, as asked about it; and that is asked about a book, a set of words, which maximally resemble the words written in the past. These questions, and the answers we give to them, seem to me only rather loosely connected with history, in the sense of the past which gave rise to the book, but they have quite a lot to do with the history of the book—in particular, the more interesting among these questions may continue that history. The book’s Nachleben is not only itself studied, it is lived.
When we treat these books in this way, and for instance represent arguments in them in our own terms, supply modern questions which are like what we take these questions to be, and so on, we are doing something which is indeed conventionally called “history of philosophy,” but is really a sort of philosophy—we might call it “history-of-philosophy philosophy.” In particular, we should beware of two misleading impressions that may be created by calling it “history of philosophy.” One is that the pursuit of the maximally consistent interpretation—a basic rule of this kind of exercise—is a genuine principle of historical reconstruction. We may think it is, for instance, because of its resemblance to a type of principle that plays a genuine role in the sort of linguistic theory I discussed earlier: the principle of charity, by which one interprets an alien language so that what should be evidently true to native speakers comes out as true, and they don’t simply contradict themselves. But that principle, at that level of generality, plays a different role: it is not just a contingent assumption, for we have no independent control over the idea that in general they might be evidently mistaken or contradicting themselves (really). In the case of a particular author and a particular text, however, there is in principle more control over this idea, and some conclusions about it can even be reached a priori. Thus people spend enormous time (I have spent some myself) on trying to find interpretations of Plato’s Sophist which make Plato’s theories consistent. But if Plato’s Sophist is about what we think it is about (and granted his theories about these very difficult subjects came when they did) it is wildly improbable that his theories on those subjects would succeed in being consistent. Of course, the rejection of the principle of consistent interpretation leaves the whole question in a very boring state, since then there are no unique solutions and there are indeterminately many ways in which it might be inconsistent. But to count boringness as a criticism—of answers, I mean, not of questions—just shows that one is doing philosophy, or at any rate, not history.
The second misleading consequence of taking the history of philosophy, in the usual sense, as history, is that we think we have a rationale for doing it; for instance, in the sense of providing ourselves with the historical background of our own ideas. But if the study is not genuinely history, then it doesn’t provide us with the historical background to anything. These texts, of ancient provenance, bearing some largely indeterminate relation in our understanding to what they meant, are complex but ambiguous objects on which we project sets of philosophical ideas rather different in content from those we would be exercising in our own person. It may be interesting, helpful, instructive, even in some ways tell us about the past, but our justification for doing it, if there is one, can only very complexly be related to the fact that these men said what they said with certain meanings in the past. History of philosophy, and in particular, history of political philosophy, can, in principle, be made into history; but as it is most often done, especially in the spirit of analytical philosophy, it must be defended, if it is defensible, as a funny kind of philosophy with archaizing elements (something in the style of Stravinsky’s Pulcinella), rather than as irresponsible history.
CONCLUSION
I have touched, broadly, on a number of themes. I have implied, without saying, that the political philosopher must be in touch with moral philosophy, and have said that, freed from the narrower preoccupations of the fact-value distinction, he will have the opportunity and the need to study substantial complex value notions, not merely in their conceptual interrelations, narrowly conceived, but in the background of beliefs and non-moral conceptions which give them sense; and that in this, his work must certainly interrelate closely with that of the social sciences. I have suggested that his work may require now a particular kind of reflexive sensitivity which is likely to be assisted by a study of epistemological issues in relation to the social sciences; and one may add, the natural sciences, too. He should have a sense of the systematic demands of philosophy without demanding a system within moral or political philosophy themselves; and he should help in some respects to keep alive the sense of genuine moral conflicts, the origins of which we may well understand, but which are prone to be prematurely rationalized out of existence. One area in which he may usefully be able to do this is the development of more complex and realistic structures in decision theory.
This leaves the question which so bothered many analytical philosophers of the fact-value persuasion: By what right can a philosopher claim the attention of an audience on these themes, especially if—as I, certainly, have taken for granted—his concerns will be in some part normative? It seems to me an encouraging sign of how far philosophy has come in the past fifteen or even ten years, that this question, which seemed so honestly pressing at one time, should seem so boring now. For its answer clearly is that he has whatever claim any adult and reflective person may have on the attention of others if he has thoughts about some important subject. He can sacrifice that claim, or fail to deliver on it, in as many ways as there are of writing words which are dead, unimaginative, stupid, ill-informed, and so forth. Since he is a philosopher, his claim to attention is more likely to be, as always, weighted towards the end of subtle analysis and the fact that some of his claims follow from others than, for instance, to lie in a wide and seasoned experience of men and events; but to suppose that that is all and only what should be asked of him, is from all points of view idiotic.
In saying that, and throughout, I have in mind still one who is doing analytical philosophy. I have spoken critically of some earlier limitations of the genre, but as I said at the beginning, I do not think that reform has changed or will change it out of all recognition. It would be pointless and unhelpful now, any more than at the beginning, to say what I take its defining characteristics to be, if indeed it has definite bounds. I take a generous view of it, but certainly much which is called philosophy is excluded. It is cheering that in political philosophy it has survived its regeneration into something interesting, with its undoubted virtues intact. In its insistence, at its best, on the values of unambiguous statement and recognizable argument; its patience; its lack of contempt for the familiar; its willingness to meet with the formal and natural sciences; its capacity for genuine and discussable progress—in all this, and despite its many and often catalogued limitations, it remains the only real philosophy there is.
1 This is to imply that the study of the conceptual interrelations of a group’s outlook forms part of the social scientific study of that group. It does not imply that it forms more than part. The idea that social science is, more than everything else, conceptual investigation (cf. Winch) is a quite different, and to me unacceptable, position.
