TWO
The Women of Trachis: Fictions, Pessimism, Ethics
You see the great indifference of the gods
to these things that have happened,
who begat us and are called our fathers
and look on such sufferings.
What is to come no one can see,
but what is here now is pitiable for us
and shameful for them,
but of all men hardest for him
on whom this disaster has fallen.
Maiden, do not stay in this house:
you have seen death and many agonies,
fresh and strange,
and there is nothing here that is not Zeus.
(Sophocles, Trachiniae 1266–78)
Philosophy, and in particular moral philosophy, is still deeply attached to giving good news. It is no longer attached (and in the case of Anglo-American philosophy, rarely ever was) to telling redemptive world-historical stories, and its good news no longer takes the forms familiar from such stories. It is not a matter of Leibniz’s cosmic cost-benefit analysis, for instance, under which the balance of good over bad is optimal, and—roughly—nothing could have been locally improved without making the whole total worse. Leibniz’s story, nevertheless, is worth a moment’s attention, before we come back to things that we now can take more seriously.
This statement of Leibniz’s view is indeed rough, because Leibniz requires us to accept two ideas which may seem incompatible though in fact they are not, and a proper formulation has to allow for this. The first idea is that we can understand what would count as a local improvement. We must understand this at some level, since Leibniz’s theory is offered as a theodicy, that is to say, as a justification offered to people who reasonably see certain local happenings, such as those recounted in Candide, as disasters, and ask why those things rather than less disastrous things have to happen.
The second idea is that we cannot really understand what would count as a local improvement. This is because the idea of an improvement gets a grip on us, and in particular prompts a demand for a justification, only if it is understood as possible. We have many mere wishes that go against possibility, to change the past, for instance, or (as a friend of mine once said) to be monogamously married to each of four people at once, but they do not support any serious conception of an improvement and are no focus for a grievance. But on Leibniz’s view, there cannot, strictly speaking, be any improvements, since no room for improvement is left by the Law of Sufficient Reason (in its strong form, in which it claims that this is the best of all possible worlds because it combines the maximum of variety with the maximum of simplicity). Nevertheless, it is still true that at a certain, very superficial, level we do understand the idea of a local improvement. For instance, we know that if it were in our power simply to affect the local environment, without consideration for wider regularities, these are the kinds of things we should try to prevent. So the two ideas are not after all incompatible. We think we have a grievance, but when we properly understand the situation, we see that we do not. So, Leibniz told us, there is a theodicy.
Whether this would really be enough for a theodicy raises further questions. For instance, it might be thought a reproach to God that the Law of Sufficient Reason should take the form it does: it suggests a heartless modernist preference on his part for intellectual elegance over a detailed concern for his creatures’ interests. If it is then replied that it is fatuous to reproach God for his choice of a creative plan, this seems to be abandoning theodicy rather than contributing to it: that reply could have been given before Leibniz started, as indeed God had already given it to Job.
The context of theodicy of course radically shapes the discussion of what might count as good or bad news. The idea of an improvement, in this connection, implies something both better and possible, and the reason why the notion of possibility came into it was that the argument was shaped in order to offer a justification. It was trying to answer a grievance, by showing that the grievance was based on a misunderstanding, an excessively narrow view of things. If we move away from the world in which Leibniz, on God’s behalf, dealt with a grievance—a world that now seems immeasurably remote from us—it is less clear how ideas of necessity and possibility shape our reactions to hideous events. If we are not sending complaints, then there seems less reason why our discontents can be lightened by the understanding that what happened was necessary. Perhaps a mere wish, so long as it is not too fantastic, can sustain them. Once the idea of a grievance goes away, with its restriction to the possible—a restriction which itself seems to be grounded in the rather strange idea of being fair to God—then perhaps the room for discontent can expand. We can be relatively discontented even with the necessary.
Alternatively, perhaps the room for discontent should contract. Have we got a focus for discontent at all, when there is no longer anyone to receive and possibly answer a complaint? Discontent makes sense, surely, only if there can be at least some expectation of something better; without that, we are merely unhappy. So should we not say that once we lose the structure of theodicy, the very idea of good news or bad news on a cosmic scale falls away? There is simply the good or bad news that comes to us on the scale of local misfortune, such as is brought about by human action, successful or unsuccessful, helpful or malign. There is no larger question. So philosophical good news, like philosophical bad news, becomes an oxymoron—unless it means the good news, or more often the bad news, about philosophy.
This must be to go too fast. Our “discontents” can surely reach beyond local unhappiness and can be directed to an object which is more than local: directed, for instance, to what we can understand of human history, of human achievements and their costs. This unhappiness perhaps does presuppose the defeated expectation of something better, but not as a focus of complaint: what has failed is not justification but hope. This is illustrated by another redemptive story which has also departed, Hegel’s. We can leave aside some of its wider cosmic aspirations: the relevant point here is that the story was meant to provide a focus for the thought that despite the horrors which underlie every human achievement, artistic, ethical or political, the enterprise will have been worth-while.
As with Leibniz, the thought must be that the horrors were necessary—without that, we simply have another focus for regret. But in Hegel, necessity is supposed to exercise a different kind of leverage on our thoughts. On Leibniz’s account, the structure of the necessity is itself part of what makes the totality worthwhile, since it is based on God’s choice of the most elegantly complex universe. For Hegel, the necessity need not in itself contribute part of the value, though perhaps it could do so. The complex working of the Geist to turn suffering into historical achievement is not itself the supreme achievement. Moreover, the value of the achievement does not have to transcend a human understanding of that value, as it does with Leibniz. Other considerations laid aside, it is merely that we can reflect “without this, that could not be, and the value of that means that this, after all, was worthwhile.”
No doubt we do not understand exactly what this reflection might mean. However, we do understand it well enough to recognize at least two different ways of rejecting it. Someone may think that the comparisons involved come out wrong: no achievement could be worth this. At the limit, this objection could take the form of thinking that the comparisons were absurd, because there was no sensible way of laying such things alongside one another. The achievement and the suffering are incommensurable, and the supposed justification, which outweighs the one with the other, comes to no more than an affirmation. Even in this form, however, this line of objection is different from that other rejection of such thoughts, which sees the very idea of such a comparison as indecent, a moral outrage. This rejection says rather, in the spirit of Kant, that no achievement could be worth this. No good or bad news can be found in history or the actual balance of things at all. That seems to rise above all such questions, and set at least the most important values, moral values, beyond history. However, the Kantian story means more than this formulation reveals. For if no ultimately good or bad news can be found in history, it follows in particular that no ultimately bad news can be found in it, and this of course carries its own kind of good news, a point we shall come back to.
Hegel’s own construction had a further feature, that the historical expression of necessity was, in its larger features, total. What had happened was all coherently necessary for the valued aspects of the outcome. We shall want to reject this strongly teleological dimension itself, but it is important that merely in rejecting this, we do not necessarily reject everything that Hegel conveyed. Schopenhauer certainly rejected the triumphalist teleology, but his declaration that life, even if it is incurably a painful and shapeless mess, is redeemed by art, conveyed what he could hardly deny was in some sense good news. At the same time, his view of the world apart from this was likely to give rise only to resignation.
Nietzsche at first accepted Schopenhauer’s expression of tragic pessimism, but he later tried to overcome the limitations of that outlook, and I take it that it was as part of this attempt that he was drawn to the model of willing the eternal recurrence. We have to ask: What it is that we need the affirmation of the eternal recurrence to overcome? What bad feeling is it—what discontent, as we put it earlier—that the horribleness of the world is supposed to inspire? This question repeatedly opens up. It opened up in the wake of Leibniz, when we asked what one’s discontent is supposed to be if there is no place for a grievance. Similarly, the failure of every possible answer to Hegel’s question may leave us with the conviction that there is no such question, and if there is no question, there will be, once again, no possible focus for anything like discontent on a more than local scale. To insist that one must be left with some focus for one’s discontents, even after Leibniz’s and Hegel’s questions have gone, may seem no better than finding some reason for being unhappy on a large scale—or, perhaps, finding some large scale on which to be unhappy. Something like this indeed seems to have been the situation of Wittgenstein. He insisted that there was no ultimate or metaphysical question about one’s discontent with the world, and this left him with a problem of finding a more than personal object for his unhappiness, a problem that he seems to have tried to solve, in part, by directing his unhappiness on to philosophy.
For Nietzsche, there was no metaphysical question raised by the horrors that underlay every human achievement. Yet something was left, something that had to be met, not, certainly, by an answer, but by an affirmation. I take it that what the world’s horrors presented him with was the prospect of being crushed by them.
Certainly he did not deny the necessity of the horrors to the achievements. Going beyond Hegel in this as in other respects, he thought that the good not only required the bad but incorporated it: one of the meta-physicians’ most basic illusions is their “belief in opposite values.”2 So if there is no honest and affirmative way of acknowledging the horrors, the only way of managing them will be to do what healthy people do all the time, and forget them. But Nietzsche seems to have thought, even if only sometimes, that such a Pyrrhonian reaction would represent weariness and a lack of vitality—a vitality taken, at this point at least, as implying truthfulness. So if there is to be truthfulness about the horrors, and no belief about their being worthwhile under some Leibnizian or Hegelian calculation, there will be only a fully conscious refusal to be crushed, and we shall need a conception, necessarily very schematic, of a life that might adequately express that refusal. The idea of the horrors having been “worth it” is operationalized, as one might quaintly put it, into the thought experiment of being prepared to will everything, with every horror and every hideous triviality, to happen endlessly over again.
It is a good question what this model could possibly achieve. The affirmation is supposed to be immensely costly, an achievement commensurate with the dreadfulness of what it wills. Yet its content, and so, inescapably, the affirmation itself, occurs in the gravity-free space of the imagination. Can the “greatest weight, ” as Nietzsche calls it, 3 really weigh anything, when it consists in willing an entirely contrary-to-fact recurrence? Can it be more than a Styrofoam rock on a film set of cosmic heroism? The more familiar alternatives to willing the eternal recurrence are better defined in their effects: lying about the horrors, or forgetting about them—where that means really forgetting about them, except on the local scale, and getting on with one’s life in a suitably unreflective way.
There is no opposition, obviously enough, between unreflective forgetting and working in philosophy. However, there are areas of philosophy which might be supposed to have a special commitment to not forgetting or lying about the horrors, among them moral philosophy. No one with sense asks it to think about them all the time, but, in addressing what it claims to be our most serious concerns, it would do better if it did not make them disappear. Yet this is what in almost all its modern forms moral philosophy effectively does. This is above all because it tries to withdraw our ethical interest from both chance and necessity, except inasmuch as the necessary sets the parameters of effective action. Kantianism and consequentialism, despite their other differences (about free will, for instance), resemble each other, as Iris Murdoch has insisted, in sharing a concern with the practical. The direction of their attention in time is not in all respects the same, consequentialism being more concerned than Kantianism is with what we can now effect, and less interested in what a given agent in the past could have done at the moment of action. Nevertheless, the situation of the rational agent intending to change the world preoccupies them both, and the very plain fact that everything that an agent most cares about typically comes from, and can be ruined by, uncontrollable necessity and chance is no part of their concerns.
When in addition morality itself is disconnected historically and psychologically from the rest of life, as it often is by moral philosophy, and is left as a supposedly self-contained and self-explanatory realm of value, then necessity and chance and the bad news they bring with them are deliberately excluded. This itself, I suggested, counts as an affirmation of good news, and it is more effective as such than any theodicy. This good news, that only the moral really or seriously or ultimately matters, is shown and not said, and one is invited to accept it without even the disturbance of mentioning the matter.
The most important question here, obviously, concerns how we should best think about such things. There are also some questions of how, if at all, moral philosophy within its own limits can conduct itself less evasively. Here I want to take up only a question narrower than either of these, about ways in which the defective consciousness of moral philosophy can be extended by appeal to fiction.
The most familiar appeal in ethics to fiction relies on the idea that fictional worlds can provide thought experiments for ethics. I take it that this is a version of the traditional idea that fiction can yield salutary exempla of virtue and vice. The idea has been significantly transmuted from an earlier world of clear statements and plain exempla to one in which fictions display ambiguities, moral conflicts that are imperfectly resolvable, multiple ethical interpretations and so forth, and this alteration reveals not merely changes in ethical consciousness but a changed relation of fiction both to ethical life and to moral philosophy. In a world in which there are clear moral statements and plain exempla, the relation between the two will tend to be something like that of text to illustration, and the role of the fiction will be that of an efficient aid. Once a certain degree of ambiguity is reached, however, the fiction will come to do things that direct statement cannot do, and working through the fiction will itself represent an extension of ethical thought, and conceivably of ethical experience. How much we can really effect by these means has been a much-discussed question; equally, to present any great fiction just in this light must be to take a limited view of it. However, in this area there is an intelligible and recognized association of fiction and ethical thought, and even of fiction and moral philosophy.
We can ask both what kinds of fiction can significantly help moral philosophy, and what styles of moral philosophy can be helped by fiction. (It could be a test of realism in a style of ethical thinking that it can learn from compelling fictions.) It is not surprising that the fiction that most easily responds to these needs, particularly when ethical thought is directed to traits of character, is (as I shall put it) “dense” fiction, above all the realistic novel, which provides a depth of characterization and social background which gives substance to the moral situation and brings it nearer to everyday experience. It may well be worth considering, for instance, how we would now describe and assess the way in which Mr. Jarndyce, in Bleak House, arranges for Esther Summerson’s future life without consulting her, and what we can make of the approval of him that Dickens seems to expect from the reader.
The features of dense fictions that lend themselves to these thoughts also have dangers, which recent criticism has helped us to identify. Precisely because the impression of deep characterization and of social reality in such fiction is an artful construct, we can be misled into thinking that our ethical judgments are being extended, that we are gaining moral insight into a situation, when in fact our moral outlook has already done some of the work in constructing that situation. The sense of something hidden and waiting to be interpreted can be an artifact merely of fictional indeterminacy. Equally, the notorious deceptions of narrative closure can impose an ethical significance which would not be available in reality—unless, as often happens, reality itself is interpreted in terms of such deceptions.
Among their other effects, dense fictions can create the impression of necessity, but they do not typically do so in the spirit that will best compensate for the limitations of moral philosophy that have been the concern of this paper. There are, certainly, exceptions: outside the novel, The Wild Duck is one. But some of the most sharply delineated re-minders of bad news in fiction are presented when necessity comes to the characters in the form of unmanageable chance, and the attempt to deploy this in the context of dense fiction runs the danger of coming too close to the territory that such notions equally supply to comedy and farce. (Some of Hardy illustrates this, including—as it seems to me—the climactic disaster in Jude the Obscure.)
There is another kind of fiction, which serves purposes in relation to moral philosophy different from the more familiar ones that are served by dense fictions. I shall call it “stark fiction, ” and a paradigm of it is offered by the tragedies of Sophocles. It is not merely that its style and structure avoid the anecdotal and the incidental, but that these resources are typically directed in a concentrated way to displaying the operations of chance and necessity. The phrase “a necessary chance, ” anangkaia tuche–, is to be found, twice, in the Ajax, and I have said something elsewhere about the ways in which this combination of ideas operates in Sophocles and about ways in which we can use it, although we do not accept all the assumptions of Sophocles’ world.4 We should not suppose, however, that the operations of stark fiction are always the same. One of several disservices that Aristotle rendered to the understanding of Greek tragedy was that of generating the idea that there is some one specific effect that makes tragedy ethically significant. Even among the surviving plays of Sophocles, to say nothing of other writers, each deals with the ethical—and reproves the limitations of our ethical ideas—in a significantly different way.
The play that is perhaps the least familiar among them, The Women of Trachis, is particularly relevant to the present discussion because its display of undeserved and uncompensated suffering is so entirely unrelieved. In a sense, it is very simple, compared for instance with the intricacies of the Oedipus Tyrannus, which it resembles to the extent of being a play of successive revelations; or compared to the Philoctetes, which it resembles in its display of hideous and destructive physical agony, but which deploys complex motives that have no part in this play.
The extreme starkness of the outcome and the simplicity of the effect are, needless to say, achieved by some complex adjustments. The character of Deianeira has often been seen as peculiarly sweet in a domestic style, a less active and formidable figure than most major Sophoclean women: like Chrysothemis, rather, or Ismene, but, unlike them, the initiator of the action, if a diffident one. She speaks in a way that can make her marriage seem a familiar type of story, as when she says (31 et seq.) that they have children now, whom Heracles “sees at times, like a farmer working in an outlying field, who sees it only when he sows and when he reaps.” But it would be a mistake to think the aim is a touching naturalism; twenty lines before this, at the very beginning of the play, she had been telling us how she was wooed by a river, which presented itself first as a bull, then as a serpent, and then as a half-human creature from whose beard a waterfall fell. The aim is not naturalism, but an impression, above all, of vulnerability. It is significant, too, that the poison she prepares is, relative to the tradition, under described. The story was that it was made from the centaur’s semen, but this element has disappeared from the play. It is tempting to think that this was too sexually assertive an image to suit Deianeira’s use of the substance in order to cancel, as she supposes, Heracles’ erotic diversion and to regain him as her husband.
It is remarkable, as Nicole Loraux has pointed out, 5 that she kills herself with a sword, a male method of death. This weapon, the same as Ajax used in his suicide, stands in a gendered opposition to the noose, for instance, which Jocasta used. But the effect is certainly not that she is another Ajax, that there has been a transgressive reversal of roles. The image is rather that of passivity, of a brutal thing having been done to her. The nurse’s narration of her death does not present us with the act itself: at one moment of that narration, Deianeira is undoing her gown, and the next moment she is dead. It is as though she had been killed rather than killed herself. The message conveyed by the weapon is not that she has killed herself as a male might do, but that she has been killed by males. In just three lines (933–35) we are told that her son had forced her to this act, and that she has without knowing it done the will of Nessus.
Heracles’ death, equally, is unsuitable, and the story has again been adjusted, in this case in order to remove any hint of glory from it, to leave it as nothing but unredeemed and hideous suffering. Traditionally, when Heracles died and his body burned, he was deified, and that version is deployed by Sophocles at the end of the Philoctetes; but not here, where Heracles’ last words only call on his “tough soul to put a steel bit in his mouth and hold back the screams, so that an end can be made of this unwanted, welcome, task”—welcome only because it will mean the end of the pain.
All the force of the play is directed to leaving in the starkest relief its extreme, undeserved, and uncompensated suffering, and this is what is registered in the famous and strange words with which it ends, quoted at the beginning of this paper. “There is nothing here that is not Zeus” is not a comforting or explanatory remark: it registers only inexplicable necessity, a necessity which may indeed be ascribed to the activities of the gods, but if so, to gods who do not explain themselves or take any notice of the suffering that they bring about. Agno–mosune– is what is ascribed to the gods, a negative thing, non-understanding, as contrasted with the sungno–mosune– of the line before, the shared understanding that Hyllus finds in his companions. Most remarkable, perhaps, is the idea that what has happened, pitiable for us, is “shameful for them”—and “them” can only be the gods. This doubly underscores the thought that there is no justification. What the gods do will be shameful because there is nothing they could say to excuse it. Moreover, their deeds can be understood as shameful only in the eyes of human beings, and that this can be so, that it even makes sense, shows that they have no authority in their power. They cannot give even the answer that Job received, an answer which offers no justification but which should at least silence the demand for one.
There is, of course, the old question, Aristotle’s question, of how pleasure or profit could be got from watching such an enactment, but this is not the question here. It is essential that there is pleasure, and that something is achieved by such a play, and that it does not serve simply as an unwelcome reminder of cosmic awfulness. This is connected with what it achieves as a work of art, and, as Nietzsche already said in The Birth of Tragedy, this must lie, in part, in its enabling us to contemplate such things in honesty without being crushed by them. When later he said that we have art so that we do not perish from the truth, 6 he did not mean that we use art in order to escape from the truth: he meant that we have art so that we can both grasp the truth and not perish from it.
It is certainly not that the play’s existence as a work of art in some sense makes up for the horrors, and to the extent that this is what the early Nietzsche meant by the idea that life is metaphysically redeemed through art, he was wrong, as he indeed came to think. The point of tragedy—or at least of those tragedies that are stark fictions—must lie rather in the fact that it lays its fictional horrors before us in a way that elicits attitudes we cannot take towards real horrors. With real horrors, we are sometimes practically engaged in them; sometimes, we have some particular reason to be upset by them; most of the time we are necessarily, and (as Nietzsche occasionally brought himself to say) healthily, inattentive to them. What we cannot possibly, or at least decently, adopt towards them is the range of attitudes appropriate to fictional horrors presented in art. Yet such a fiction can carry some understanding of the real horrors. One might say that it reveals their metaphysical structure, their relation, or lack of it, to the universe; except that any such formula follows Aristotle’s bad example in trying to give a general account of “the tragic effect, ” and indeed does worse than Aristotle in hinting, as neither his account nor Nietzsche’s does, that some suitably profound philosophical formulation might take the place of the tragedy itself.
It is a mistake to look for one aim even of stark fictions, and the immensely general ideas that I have glanced at here could at best offer a kind of pattern within which the effects of different works might be variously construed. Moreover, most of the things that can be achieved by stark fictions, and through the attitudes appropriate to them, are necessarily obscure. One of their more obvious achievements, however, if not the most basic or important, is to offer a necessary supplement and a suitable limitation to the tireless aim of moral philosophy to make the world safe for well-disposed people.
1 For an accessible and informative treatment, see William and Martha Kneale, The Development of Logic (Oxford, 1962), chs. i–iii.
2 See Frank Kermode, The Classic (London, 1975).
3 See P. O. Kristeller, ‘Byzantine and Western Platonism in the Fifteenth Century’, in Renaissance Concepts of Man (New York, 1972), and references. The quotation from Petrarch (Trionfo della Fama, 3. 4–6) is taken from this article.
4 All references to the Presocratics are to the 6th edition of Diels-Kranz, Die Fragmente der Vorsokratiker, in each case to the ‘B’ section of the material on a given writer.
For an exegesis of these words of Heracleitus, see W.K.C. Guthrie, A History of Greek Philosophy (Cambridge, 1962–), i. 417–19.
5 Edward Hussey, The Presocratics (London, 1972), p. 117.
6 Hussey, p. 116.
7 Themistius Or. 26, p. 383, Dindorf.
8 In this emphasis, as also on some central questions of interpretation, I follow the important article of G.E.L. Owen, ‘Eleatic Questions’, reprinted in R. E. Allen and D. J.Furley ed., Studies in Presocratic Philosophy, vol. ii (London, 1975), pp. 48–81.
9 As Owen showed, ‘Eleatic Questions’, n. 54.
10 Cf. Parmenides, fr. 8, 37; and also a later monist, Melissus, fr. 8.
11 The case is argued by H. Fränkel, ‘Xenophanes’ Empiricism and his Critique of knowledge’, in A.P.D. Mourelatos ed., The Presocratics (New York, 1974), pp. 118–131; English translation of an article collected in his Wege und Formen frügriechischen Denkens (Munich, 1960).
12 Fränkel, p. 124.
13 Sextus Empiricus, Outlines of Pyrrhonism, 1. 206, 2. 188.
14 For this suggestion and discussion, see Charlotte L. Stough, Greek Skepticism (Berkeley and Los Angeles, 1969).
15 By Richard H. Popkin, in his History of Scepticism from Erasmus to Spinoza (Berkeley and Los Angeles, 1979).
16 The state of the question is set out in Guthrie, vol. iii, ch. 12.
17 This was not the only use of this celebrated distinction. By some writers, nomos was praised for saving us from phusis; by others, phusis was indeed used in criticism of nomos, but in order to extend rather than contract the range of moral ideas, as in a famous fragment of Alcidamas (quoted by the scholiast on Aristotle, Rhetoric, 1373b): ‘God made all men free: phusis never made anyone a slave’, and cf. similar opinions referred to by Aristotle, Politics, 1253b20.
18 In the Gorgias, a dialogue probably a little earlier than the Republic, Plato offered, in the person of Callicles, a more striking, eloquent, and altogether more formidable expression of the egoistic alternative. Socrates’ answers to him are less than satisfactory; in part, this is because Callicles is unconvincingly made to accept the idea that egoism must come down to a very crude form of hedonism.
19 In his Open Society and its Enemies (London, 1957).
20 The Birth of Tragedy, particularly sec. 17. On the question of Nietzsche’s attitudes to Socrates, see Werner J. Dannhauser, Nietzsche’s View of Socrates (Ithaca N.Y., 1974).
21 In his lectures on Greek philosophy: Gesammelte Werke, Musarion ed. (Munich, 1920–9), ii. 364–9. Quoted by Dannhauser, p. 109.
1 See Nietzsche, “Attempt at a Self-Criticism, ” added to the 1886 edition of The Birth of Tragedy. One of the personal qualities that Nietzsche saluted in Schopenhauer was, notably, his cheerfulness. See “Schopenhauer as Educator, ” translated by William Arrowsmith in Unmodern Observations (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1990), 162.
2 Nietzsche’s phrase is “der Glaube an die Gegensätze der Werte.” See Beyond Good and Evil, sec. 2.
3 Nietzsche’s phrase is “dasgrösste Schwergewicht.” See The Gay Science, sec. 351.
4 Lines 485, 803. I discuss Sophocles’ significance for us (and, more generally, that of tragedy and the epic) in Shame and Necessity (Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press, 1993). For the phrase from the Ajax see 104, 123–24.
5 In Façons tragiques de tuer une femme (Paris, 1985), translated by Anthony Forster as Tragic Ways of Killing a Woman (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1987).
6 “Wir haben die Kunst, damit wir nicht an der Wahrheit zugrunde gehn.” This is from the Nachlass of the 1880’s. See Werke in 3 Bänden, edited by Karl Schlechte (Munich, 1966), vol. 3, 832.
THREE
Understanding Homer: Literature, History and Ideal Anthropology
I should like to start with some assumptions about anthropology, which I shall state dogmatically and most of which I should like to think are banal. In the peculiar case of homo sapiens, ethological accounts of the species inevitably lead into cultural descriptions of various social groups; this is a version of the old truth that it is the nature of human beings to live under convention (cf. Williams 1995).* Cultures, moreover, display a high degree of secondary elaboration, and while it is true—indeed, blindingly obvious—that significant ranges of human behaviour are to be explained in terms of natural selection, this is for the most part true at a level of fairly general description and in relation to environments which are equally rather broadly identified. For much of human behaviour, cultural description (in the sense in which different societies display different cultures) is going to be an essential element in understanding.
Every society has a past, in the sense that what happened earlier has shaped what is present, and virtually every society has some stories or other to tell about its past. Some societies—in particular, literate ones—have critical views of these stories about their past, views which both provide further evidence for our own enquiries into their past, and are themselves predecessors of those enquiries. In reading those and other written records, and interpreting artefacts or traces of earlier peoples, we have to use some of the same skills as we use in physically encountering peoples who live in a culture unfamiliar to us. In the case of those whom we actually encounter, we have to achieve an understanding of what they say, of what they believe, and of what their aims are, by a process of triangulation that involves all these three elements, and it is a constraint on this process being possible at all that those people’s concerns and interests and perceptual powers should be taken not to be too radically different from our own.
However, we need not and should not assume that the processes of interpretation require us to find an equivalent to what they say in terms that we are prepared to use ourselves. It is true that in order to understand social transactions and interpret them in this spirit, we need to “get inside” them and to have a sense of what it is to act for the kinds of reasons that these agents have; but this does not imply that these are reasons that we ourselves have. Someone who has the sense of another culture can imagine, improvise, enact and respond appropriately to situations in which he finds himself, and in that sense he has internalised the reasons of people living in that culture; but this does not make them his reasons, any more than the actor’s capacity to become an enraged ancient king makes him, even temporarily, into such a king. This is the capacity to take up what I have elsewhere called “the ethnographic stance”, and it is a feature of our general understanding of human beings and of the various parts that culture can play in their lives that we should understand that such a stance is possible.
This capacity plays its part also in understanding the past. This is part of the content of the cliché that the past is “another country”—to a certain extent, our approach in historical understanding must share something with our approach to unknown peoples. In some ways historical enquiry is harder. There is, above all, no participant observation: we lack the sight of their doings and the sound of their utterances. On the other hand, we get to the past not just in the ways in which we are figured as getting to exotic peoples, that is to say, by simply arriving in a state of total ignorance. This image of what it is to encounter a previously isolated people, which assimilates it to the entirely schematic situation of “radical translation” that has so interested philosophers, is itself in almost all cases a drastic exaggeration, 2 but it does make a difference that we are linked to the historical past by a self-conscious set of traditions. We reach the past by a route each step of which, in the favourable case, stands in explanatory relations to the steps before and after it. For these and other reasons, the case of historical cultural understanding is different enough from the situation of the social anthropologist as participant observer for it to be foolish to regard the past simply as another country. Nevertheless, there is enough in common in the ideas of interpretation, coming to see how things went in another cultural situation, for us to signal the connection by calling certain kinds of historical understanding “ideal anthropology”. It is anthropology, because it shares these forms of understanding, and it is ideal, not because it is perfect, but because it does not have the kinds of evidence which are central to the paradigm examples of social anthropology in action.
Some of our evidence from the past consists of physical objects, artefacts and other similar traces. Some of it consists of documents. Some of it, as we have already seen, may consist of documents in which a past society sought to record its own history. Some of it, which is the present concern, consists of what we may call works of literature. We do not have to assume that the society we are studying had a notion of “literature” or applied it to these documents. If they did not, then manifestly we have to take extreme care in using any such notion. However, in the case of a self-conscious society with a developed critical stance, there may be enough in the local practice to back up our seeing these writings as works of literature, or something like that. Literature can provide evidence for ideal anthropology; as we might also say, the interpretation of literature can be part of the interpretation that is the business of ideal anthropology.
There are familiar and enormous problems in this process. For instance, in the case of the ancient Greeks, which is the example that will be my concern here, there is a well known problem with regard to using the surviving tragedies as evidence about the society in which they were written. Greek tragedy tended to adopt a “high”, archaising, manner, which means that as direct evidence of the ethical or other concepts of its audience, it has to be taken with extreme caution. This is the reason why Sir Kenneth Dover, in writing about popular conceptions of Greek morality, relied more on comedy (because it had to make people laugh) and legal speeches (because they had to persuade a jury) than on tragedy or epic (Dover 1974, 1–45).* However, it is still true that tragedies had to be intelligible to their audience. Indeed, they were produced in competition to impress and engage that audience, perhaps to overwhelm them, and that should be able to tell us something about the relations between the ethical conceptual structures of Greek tragedy and the outlook of such an audience.
In the case of Homeric epic, however, there is a still more radical displacement involved. It is not merely that the Homeric poems are expressed in formulaic language which noone ever spoke. In addition, the people in classical Athens who read and discussed these poems when they had been written down knew that they belonged to an earlier time, that they had in some way or another been transmitted from an earlier society. The actual history of the poems is, of course, a very complex and still unresolved question, and I am not competent to discuss it, any more than I can discuss their relations to the archaeology of archaic Greece. However, if we assume, uncontroversially, that they stem from an oral tradition, we have to suppose an earlier non-literate audience to whom these poems, or parts of them, were recited; and to this audience, too, they already spoke of an earlier time.
This means that anyone who is engaged in interpreting the concepts used in these poems, or, as we may say rather vaguely, the “outlook” of the poems (though we should not assume that the outlook of the poems is always the same, in particular between the Iliad and the Odyssey) has a complex task. Indeed, there is more than one possible task. We may be concerned with the world or worlds represented in the poems, for instance with the kinds of concerns, motives or beliefs that Achilles or Odysseus is represented as having. Or we may be interested in the out-look of the poems’ original audience, something which for more than one reason is very difficult to recover: one thing that we should not assume is that this is just the same as the outlook of the poems, any more than we can believe that their artefacts or their social organization were the same as those represented in the poems—as I have already said, the poems spoke even to their first audience about a past time. Yet again, we may be most interested in the outlook of the poems’ readers in classical Athens, and in what the poems meant to them.
The first of these undertakings is importantly not independent of the third. We can hope to recover something we could call the outlook of the poems only by reconstructing what they meant to some audience, and that audience must be the first recipients of the poems about whom we know anything very much. In the light of what we know, we can try to “lay off” for the elements in the poems which that audience would have found different from their own life, as opposed to those that they found familiar. It may seem that there is an impossibly circular task here, of constructing the audience from the poems, and reading the poems in the light of what they might mean to such an audience. But this is to neglect the fact that about this audience there is a lot of extra evidence, and it also overlooks the vital point that, with regard both to this extra evidence and to the Homeric poems themselves, this is very far from a situation of radical translation, even in the fairly attenuated sense of this in which it applies to our encounters with previously unknown people. These poems are linked to us by an enormously complex and powerful tradition, in which the business of reading and understanding them has been transmitted from one historical period to another. People certainly disagree on the question of how far we understand “the world of Homer”. But, unless they are being exceedingly cautious or provocative, they are usually prepared to admit that there is such a thing as understanding Homeric Greek, something which informed Greek scholars mostly do rather well, and beginners do badly. We can, to a considerable degree of agreement, translate the poems into English. The firm conviction that we can do this is supported by the historical traditions that link us to the ancient world, by the fact that informed readers today are not arriving at these texts by historical parachute, but have learned ancient Greek from someone who learned ancient Greek from someone who. . . . This does not, of course, guarantee “correctness”, or remove huge interpretative and historical problems, but it does provide the absolutely essential foundation of conducting the operations of ideal anthropology on these works at a level at which they can produce results and make some sense. A jokey classical scholar of my acquaintance, in parody of the methods of deconstruction, cheerily suggested that the word “album” in a poem of Horace might be taken to mean a book in which you stick photographs; it is quite instructive to consider how many reasons, of how many kinds, there are why this is not a good idea.
In my book Shame and Necessity (Williams 1993)* I tried to reach an understanding of certain ideas in the Homeric poems, in particular ethical ideas such as agency, responsibility, shame, and constraint. In the case of some of these ideas, I argued that they were more like ideas that we ourselves possess than many commentators have supposed. It is important that it was not implicit in the method of enquiry that this should be the result, or at least to this extent. I in fact concentrated on those ideas about which I was convinced that they bear a rather close relation to our own, in particular because I was concerned with using those ideas to help us understand ourselves, but there are of course many other conceptions employed by the ancient Greeks (some of which I discussed) which are much more alien to us, and I did not in any way wish to deny it. While all this is true, there are some ideas which we share with the ancient Greeks, and in particular with the audience of the Homeric poems, which are so basic to the understanding and construction of human action that one would need very powerful evidence (to put it mildly) to make one believe the claims made by some previous scholars that these concepts were lacking in the Greek world.
The claims made by Bruno Snell, for instance, that “Homeric people” (a concept which he used in an unclear way to provide a bridge between Homer’s characters and Homer’s readers or listeners) lacked any idea of a unitary agent capable of making decisions, or even of an agent who had a unitary body—such a suggestion runs up against a very strong presumption that unless one ascribes some such notions to the people represented in these poems and to the people who heard or read them, one would not be able to make sense of the poems at all. It is not offered as a dogmatic universal claim. As with other kinds of natural history, it is exceedingly rash to anticipate the marvels that one may encounter in the way of cultural development: or, to put the point in a rather more sophisticated way, while there must be common materials that we ourselves and those under study share, one must be aware that they may present themselves in quite unexpected forms and combinations. However, with regard to notions which are as central to our understanding of human activities as the idea of a decision, or that of a human being’s purposively moving his or her limbs, one should try a number of other explanations before one concludes that they are absent from the world that one is trying to interpret.
In the case of Snell and those who thought like him, there are at least four reasons why he arrived at these mistaken conclusions. One is simply a failure to read the text carefully enough and to think consequently about it. For instance, with regard to motivational elements such as thumos, which on Snell’s view were regarded in the Homeric world as virtually autonomous sources of action, the text itself makes clear that a bodily agent is needed if an action is to spring from such a principle: the primary idea is not that thumos does things, but that an agent does things in or with his thumos. Second, there is a failure to allow for the “literary” distance between the epic style and its audience. “We should be cautious about moving . . . from poetry to culture” as James Redfield has well said (Redfield 1975, 22), * and some of the inferences about the supposed psychology of Homeric characters, in particular of Homeric heroes, are based on an artefact of style, a refusal of the anecdotal which lends a certain dignity and inevitability to the narrative. One example of this is the development of Achilles’ willingness to reach an agreement with Agamemnon; another, perhaps, is the postponement of Penelope’s recognition of her husband (cf. Williams 1993, 46–48). In such cases, it is naive, not merely to read off an implied psychology from the structure of the narrative, but even to suppose that there is anything that could be read off simply from the narrative and taken to be an implied psychology.
Another mistake has been to impose on the Homeric poems, or indeed any other work of ancient literature, the misguided conclusions of modern philosophies. In particular, in the case of agency and the psychology of action, it is a crudely Cartesian philosophy that is to blame. This is particularly so with regard to the absence from Homer or other Greek writers of a (supposed) concept of the will. This is an area in which there is a peculiarly sensitive relation between similarity and difference, between materials that have to be taken for granted in making sense of the text at all, and materials which are the subject of specific cultural elaborations, as the notion of the will quite certainly is in our own history. Some of that local history is involved with the Cartesian philosophy, which has both influenced people’s conceptions of what action might be, and is itself the product of previous constructions, some of them (such as those of Augustine) of considerable ideological power. If one tries to interpret conceptions used in the ancient world by reference to these ideas, one will misinterpret them. The misinterpretation, in this kind of case, consists in more than anachronism. It is part of the argument against the Cartesian misinterpretation of Homer that it forces us to neglect or deny phenomena which are basic to our making sense of human action at all, and hence basic to our making sense of human action as it is described in the Homeric poems. But to the extent that these phenomena are basic to making sense of action at all, then they are basic to making sense of action in our own cultural context as well, and the Cartesian misinterpretation is not simply an historical misunderstanding, but a philosophical mistake, a misunderstanding of ourselves.
Another error that can be cured by reflection on the principles of ideal anthropology is that embodied in Snell’s so-called “lexical principle”, which is to the effect that the Greeks had a particular idea only if they had a word that expressed it. One particularly strong version of this is that if the Greeks had a certain idea, then they had to have a word which expressed this idea and nothing else, and in these terms it has been argued that the Homeric poems contain no idea of practical deliberation. This cannot survive the very obvious reflection that equally in modern English there is no expression that means practical deliberation and nothing else, except the expression “practical deliberation” itself, which is first of all virtually a term of philosophical art, and secondly not an expression likely to turn up in a poem. But even if it is more liberally construed, the principle is naive, because it elides the distinctions between the relatively untheorised language of everyday transactions, and the more theoretical kind of vocabulary that will be needed if we are going to compare the categories used by one society with those used by another.
Yet another problem with the lexical principle is the question of what direction we should look in for the expression in question. It has been remarked, for instance, that in the Homeric poems there is no word that means “intention”, or “intentional” as an attribute of actions. This may well be true. However, there is an adjective, hekon, which almost always means “intentionally”, and indeed, though it is an adjective, effectively functions as an adverb. It is a very striking fact that in the Iliad and the Odyssey it occurs only in the nominative singular, a phenomenon which ties it very firmly to the sense of “intentionally”; its negative counter-part, aekon, by contrast, occurs also in other cases, and this is appropriate to its sense, which is more often “unwillingly”. Such straightforward philological facts as these are a basic part of the evidence on which ideal anthropology must depend in studying a society from which we possess written texts.3 Of course, it is only in the light of certain philosophical presuppositions, which help to form the assumptions of such a method, that the evidence can be identified as evidence, as telling us something relevant about the conceptual structures that belonged to a past society.
Several of the points in this discussion have related in one way or another to issues of what may be expected to be universal in our understanding of human societies, and what is culturally variable. I have already said that we should be cautious in dogmatically asserting that some given elements must be universal: in assuming, as one might put it, that philosophical reflection on the methodology of an ideal anthropology can yield a body of synthetic necessary truths. Much of the history of philosophy, particularly in the last two centuries, is littered with the rubble of constructions that have aimed to achieve such results. I said earlier that we are well advised to preserve our willingness to be surprised by the natural history of human conventions. However, even if we do not offer any rich body of what are claimed to be substantive universal necessities, there is, in the area of action and its ethical surroundings, a set of very basic ideas which, at the least, lay an extremely heavy burden of proof on anyone who claims to find a society in which these conceptions were not operative.
Until that proof or argument arrives, as it notably failed to do in the case of the Homeric Greeks, we may claim that everywhere:
1. There are actions—people do things, and are recognised by others as doing things.
2. Actions are understood to lead to outcomes, some of which are intended and some not.
3. Sometimes the outcomes are bad, to be regretted by the agent or by someone else or both.
4. When there is an outcome regretted by someone else, there can be a demand for a response.
There is another item which might be added to these, though it is perhaps less utterly banal than the others:
5. People are sometimes in unusual or untypical states which affect their actions and their intentions.
This last idea relates particularly to the interest that members of a society have over time in their fellow agents, and in the extent to which they can be expected to behave in a steady or an unreliable manner.4 It may be that in most places there is some interest in such a consideration, though certainly the ways in which it is understood, and also the factors that may be understood as affecting an agent’s actions or intentions at a given time, will be very different in different societies.
These are the materials of something like an idea of responsibility, and it is reasonable, until we meet firm evidence to the contrary, to expect that they will be found in every society. However, what is quite certain is that there is no one idea of responsibility to be found in every society, but rather a range of notions that vary between them. These notions interpret the materials in different ways, and give them very different emphases in relation to one another. This is the kind of account that I tried to give, in outline form, in Shame and Necessity (cf. Williams 1993, 50–74), considering the Greek and specifically the Homeric case, about which it has often been asserted that ideas of responsibility in anything like our sense were missing. The present point is that, if anything like this account is correct, it represents a clear, but also an untypically simple, example of the relations between the universal and the local. Certain materials or elements are universal; what is local and various are the ways in which the materials are arranged, emphasised and interpreted. It is perhaps unlikely that in general the universal can be identified and deployed in such a simple way: indeed, it may well be that such an account is too simple for this case itself.
However, if, as I have suggested, anthropology must involve itself in an interpretational task; and if the study of past societies must, in part, consist of a kind of anthropology without participation, which I have called “ideal anthropology”, which applies, though with special features, to those societies from which we possess written, and in particular “literary” remains: then certainly we have to reflect very keenly on how strong the assumptions of the interpretational activity must be, and how far they do yield universal elements. It remains a pressing task for the philosophy of anthropology and, as a special case, for the philosophy of history.
* Making Sense of Humanity and Other Philosophical Papers, 1982–1993 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1995). —Ed.
1 The general idea of interpretation I am using is of course familiar from the work of Donald Davidson. For the “ethnographic stance” and the possibility of understanding without identification, see Williams 1986. [“Reply to Simon Blackburn, ” Philosophical Books 27 (1986).—Ed.]
2 It no doubt also carries heavily ideological presuppositions about the relations between “scientific” investigators and “primitive” peoples. The purely philosophical concentration on radical translation need not in itself carry such presuppositions: it is a device for isolating what is taken for granted in interpreting anyone.
* K. J. Dover, Greek Popular Morality in the Time of Plato and Aristotle (Oxford: Blackwell, 1974).
* Hereafter Williams 1993.—Ed.
* James Redfield, Nature and Culture in the Iliad (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1975). —Ed.
3 As has already been explained, the relations of the written texts to “Homeric society”are more complex than this formulation implies.
4 For some speculations in this area cf. Williams 1990, 1–10. [Reference cannot be identified. —Ed.]
SOCRATES AND PLATO
FOUR
Pagan Justice and Christian Love
In his article ‘Socrates’ Contribution to the Greek Sense of Justice’, 1 Gregory Vlastos claimed that in classical Greek thought and practice the norms of justice were ‘discriminately applied’ to two classes of people:one’s enemies and one’s social inferiors—in particular, among the latter, slaves. He argued that Socrates, while he had nothing to say about the second of these restrictions, took an important step forward with respect to the first, and originated the idea that one’s treatment of other people should be guided not by the matter of their being friends or enemies, but by moral considerations. Socrates accepted that this policy could put one, in material terms, at a disadvantage in relation to people who did not share it, in particular people whom the traditional view would regard as one’s enemies, and since he thought that one certainly had no reason to pursue a policy that was not in some basic sense to one’s advantage, he had to think that a virtuous life was sufficient for one’s ultimate advantage—the position that he argues, for instance, in the Gorgias.
All this was part of Vlastos’s aim, sustained over a long period, of showing that Socrates did much to originate a higher view of norms applying to social and personal conduct, one that transcended the perceptions of his contemporaries and led in the direction of an ideal of a life shaped basically by moral considerations. Those considerations laid a lot of weight on an idea of equal concern for others, and on values that put considerations of personal need and moral merit in place of determinations made by rank and power. They were thus historically, and in Vlastos’s case personally, associated with some (typically Protestant) interpretations of Christianity. He was scrupulous in not taking what might be called a ‘Fourth Eclogue’ view of Socrates or of any other pagan thinker. But he did associate Socrates with a number of moral advances that he saw as eventually forming part of a Christian moral outlook.
In these remarks, I should like to touch on three aspects of the large and deep issues that are raised by this picture of our ethical history. What did the traditional view, rejected by the Socratic outlook, 2 think about justice towards friends and enemies? What did the Socratic outlook want to put in the place of that view? How far could it go on the path it had chosen without running into a problem familiar to Christianity and unknown to earlier paganism, that the value of an individual human being, by becoming morally infinite, runs the risk of becoming effectively zero?
1 PAGAN JUSTICE
When Vlastos said that the norms of justice were discriminately applied to enemies and to slaves, as contrasted with other people, he meant that the traditional Greek practice allowed one to behave unjustly towards those groups. This itself could mean either of two things: that the Greeks allowed behavior towards these groups that indeed was unjust and would be seen by us to be so; or that they allowed behavior towards those people that the Greeks themselves saw as unjust. Vlastos of course meant the first of these things, but he meant the second as well. This might seem a surprising claim, and it is natural to reply that Greek practice would be better described in the following terms: behavior that would be unjust in other circumstances can be regarded as just if it is directed towards slaves or towards one’s enemies. If the Greeks’ thought is expressed in these terms, the Socratic outlook can still be taken to have introduced a reform, but the reform has to be differently described, as altering the criteria of justice rather than taking the criteria of justice and widening their application. In the case of friends and enemies, I think that this is, roughly, what we should say. However, this is not the case with slaves, and although slavery is not the main subject of this paper, it will be helpful to say something about it first.
With regard to slaves, something like Vlastos’s formulation does indeed apply. Between masters and slaves there was no justice, and bad treatment of a person’s slave was a wrong against that person, not against the slave. This followed from what it was to be a slave. If any question arose about the just or unjust treatment of slaves, it was not a question within the institution of slavery but a question about it: whether it could be a just arrangement that permitted one human being to be possessed by another, with the result that their relations were not regulated by justice. This question was occasionally raised, but not very often. There are one or two surviving remarks about the injustice of slavery, based on the idea that it was a matter of pure chance, the result of arbitrary force, who gets enslaved, 4 and it is an objection of this kind that Aristotle tried to answer in the famous discussion in Book I of the Politics. Aristotle saw very clearly what he had to show. He thought both that slavery was (roughly) necessary to the life of the polis, and that the polis was naturally the best organization of human life. From this it already follows in a sense that it is natural that there should be slaves. What Aristotle had to show, however, if the claims of nature were to silence complaints of injustice, was something more, that for some particular people, it was natural that they should be slaves rather than somebody else. His attempt to deliver this conclusion appears to have been hardly better received in the ancient world than it has been by modern critics, and it is obvious why this should be so. If Aristotle were right, and if slavery were properly conducted, then the slaves themselves would have nothing to complain of. But the ancient Greeks quite rightly thought that the condition of slavery was one that any human being had reason to complain of. From Homer on, being captured into slavery was a paradigm of human disaster, a brutal form of bad luck. In the classical period, free people were constantly reminded of the contingencies of slavery, if not by the capture of slaves, which at least happened elsewhere, then by manumission, which happened in front of them.
The standard Greek attitude to slavery was not that it was a just institution; nor, again, that it was an unjust institution, a view which would have encouraged the thought that it should be replaced by something else, and they had nothing with which to replace it. Their view rather was that the institution was necessary, and that for those subjected to it it was bad luck. In that sense, it lay outside the considerations of justice.
For us it does not lie outside those considerations, and is a paradigm of injustice. However, this does not mean that those same traditional materials, economic or cultural necessity and bad luck, make no contribution to our thinking about social life. We use them all the time. It may be that we have the aspiration that no social or economic relation should lie outside considerations of justice. To the extent that we have that aspiration, we try either (with the Left) to replace necessity and luck with justice, or (with the Right) to show that the results of necessity and luck can be just. Neither project is such a success as to enable us to say that in these matters we have decisively gone beyond the ethical condition of the ancients.
In the case of slavery, then, we can say that both the institution itself and what went on inside it lay, for the most part, outside considerations of justice. With friends and enemies, on the other hand, it was different: it was rather that the categories of ‘friend’ and ‘enemy’ structured what was just and unjust. Not to help a friend or return benefits received was a clear case of injustice, while returning violence with similar violence (or with more) was not only comprehensible but could be demanded.
In his article, Vlastos tends to express the traditional view in terms of ‘returning wrong for wrong’, and in this he follows the passage of Plato [Crito 49 B 8 seq] in which Socrates expresses his rejection of such a view. But it is hardly surprising that this is not how the traditional view standardly described itself.5 The only direct statement I have been able to find that explicitly links injustice with a favorable view of the ‘friends and enemies’ principle is by Gorgias [Pal. 18, DK 82 B 11a]: ‘So was it a matter of wanting to help one’s friends or harm one’s enemies? For in these interests someone would do injustice. But my own case was altogether the opposite . . .’ Even this does not legitimate the injustice, and in any case the speaker mentions the matter only to walk away from it.6 The famous passage from the Choephoroi [306 seq], which Vlastos mentions, about the age-old maxim drasanti pathein says twice that the repayment of killing with killing is a matter of dikê or dikaion.* On this matter, as opposed to slavery, the traditional view is not appropriately expressed in terms of the limitations of justice, but rather in terms of what was thought to be just.
Of course, the actions that the principle could legitimate might be exactly the sort of actions that in other circumstances would be unjust: that is part of its point. Pindar (a little out of character perhaps) says [Pyth. 2.83 seq] ‘as an enemy against an enemy I shall creep up like a wolf, padding one way and another in crooked paths’. Herodotus [8.105–6] tells an appalling story about a man who had been castrated, and who contrived ‘the greatest repayment to someone by whom he had been wronged that we have ever heard of.’ Thucydides [2.67.4] tells how the Athenians killed without a hearing and threw into a pit some Lacedaimonian envoys and others, ‘thinking it justified or right’ (dikaiountes) to do the same thing as the Lacedaimonians had done to some Athenians and their allies at the beginning of the war. There are, of course, many other such examples.
2 SOCRATIC REFORM
If, in this traditional way, A does some horrible thing to B because B is his enemy, there are at least three different sorts of objection that may be made. (i) Not A: if anyone is to do that to B, it should not be A. (ii) Not B: these are not circumstances in which B should have any such thing done to him. (iii) Not that thing: noone should do that thing to anybody. Of course, the situation may be such as to invite more than one of these comments, possibly all of them, at once. (i) and (ii) represent different aspects of a demand that the return for harms should be depersonalized. (i) may demand that personal vengeance should be replaced by a public, impersonal agency. This change has two desirable results. One is that what happens to B is not an expression of A’s rage, prejudice, and possibly error, and so may bear a more reliable relation to what B has done, if anything. The other benefit is that an impersonal agency is less likely to provoke a further round of violence from the person whom it has (as we may now put it) punished: its action may, if we are lucky, finish the matter. This speaks to (ii), as the concerns of the Oresteia make very clear: the mere fact that I am in the third or fourth generation of a family with a history of violence need no longer operate to involve me in it. The same applies, very obviously, to vendettas between families or other groups. Another advantage of the public authority may be its regulation of (iii). What A does to B in the primitive situation may be, as much as any other feature of the transaction, determined by rage; even apart from issues of justice, it may easily be hideous enough to make it certain that this will not be the end of the affair.
The effect of pressing these kinds of objection, and in particular of establishing a public authority, is to leave the category of an enemy with less ethical significance. For one thing, when the vendetta and similar relationships are rejected, B will not be A’s enemy just because he falls into a certain class, e.g. by belonging to a certain family; if he is A’s enemy at all, it will be because of what he himself has done. This thought is precisely expressed by Demosthenes [23.56]: ‘there is no class [genos] of friends and enemies, but each of them is brought into being by what is done.’ Further, even if B is A’s enemy, and is so by these improved criteria, there are many things that A cannot do to B, because he cannot, within the approved procedures of society, do them to anyone: these include the forms of violence that have become the monopoly of the public authority. In respect of what with us would be criminal proceedings, the only enemies will be public enemies. With private proceedings, the processes of the law will to some extent have drawn the teeth of enmity. By the 4th century, it was an Athenian commonplace that compensation sought in litigation was legalized revenge.
Such ideas are very familiar, for instance in relation to a Lockean justification of the state. As this point suggests, they are also familiarly related to matters of justice. To reduce in these ways and to this extent the ethical significance of enmity serves the purposes of civil peace, cooperation and personal security, but it more specifically serves the ends of justice, because it brings it about that if anything disadvantageous happens to B in the name of justice, then the nature and severity of what happens to him bears a non-arbitrary and publicly intelligible relation to what B can reasonably be supposed to have actually done. This makes it very clear that laying aside in these ways the ‘friends and enemies’ rule does not imply that one has given up the principle of drasanti pathein, the idea that one who has done wrong should suffer. On the contrary, what the elimination of private vengeance brings about in the order of justice is best explained by saying that it makes it more certain that one who has done wrong will be brought in an orderly and reliable way to suffer in an appropriate degree. Of course, someone might have grounds for giving up both the ‘friends and enemies’ rule and the principle of drasanti pathein. We should ask what those grounds might be, and what they might have to do with justice. We must also ask whether Socrates was such a person.
The argument in the Crito goes: one should not be unjust to anyone, so one should not be unjust to anyone in return for injustice. One should not do anything bad to others, even when they have done something bad to oneself, since doing bad and doing injustice are the same. So one should not do injustice in return, or do anything bad to others, whatever they have done to oneself. Socrates says that this is and will be an unpopular doctrine. As we saw earlier, he is happy to say that the popular view is that one can do injustice in return for injustice, but this inaccurate and question-begging formula does not focus his disagreement with the popular view. Indeed, it is not yet clear what exactly his disagreement is with the popular view, because it is unclear what it is to do something bad (kakôs poiein) to someone else. If this simply means that we should never do anything to another that involves our acting badly, we are left where we were: the traditional view will simply say that being horrible to one’s enemies does not involve acting badly. What Socrates means, rather, is that we should not do anything to others that is bad for them. This is equivalent to saying that we must not harm them. This is what Socrates believed, and Xenophon, in his encomium on Socrates at the end of the Memorabilia [4.8.11], says of him that he was a just man, so as never to harm anyone in any way.
If suffering were a sure sign that one was being harmed, then this would dispose of drasanti pathein. But it is not, as becomes clear in Book I of the Republic. There, Polemarchus expresses the traditional doctrine by saying that it is justice to harm bad people and one’s enemies, and he is refuted by Socrates on the ground that harming something must mean making it worse with regard to its special excellence, so that harming a person must consist in making him a worse person, which is something that justice could never require of us. It is this sense, equally, that gives rise to the Socratic doctrine, deployed in the Gorgias in heroic defiance of the prejudices of common sense, that the good man cannot be harmed.
If justice imposes sufferings, and those sufferings can serve one’s interests in being a good person, then drasanti pathein may, to that extent, remain in place. Can its purely retributive aspects remain in place? In one sense, perhaps yes, since what is in the interests of a person’s virtue includes being treated justly: if the just treatment of a malefactor consists in appropriate punishment, then punishment should be applied merely because it is just, and that constitutes a form of retributivism. On the other hand, the Socratic view will go beyond retributivism when that is understood in the most primitive sense, that all we need mention in explaining what a wrong-doer deserves is a balancing of his act and our response: on the Socratic view, we must refer also to the wrong-doer’s interests.
Socrates’s attack in the Crito on ‘doing injustice in return’ directs itself only obliquely to what the traditional view meant, and not at all to what it said. In deploying his new, ethicised, conception of harm, implicitly in the Crito and explicitly in the Gorgias and Republic, Socrates addresses himself directly to what the traditional view said, but—it now turns out—not at all to what it meant. When the old view instructed one to harm one’s enemy, it did not mean that one should make him worse: it meant that one should make him suffer. Socrates instructs us not to harm anyone. But that turns out to mean that one should not make him worse: what has that got to do with not making him suffer? The most that Socrates seems to have done is to instruct those who accepted the old view to think about something they perhaps thought too little about, their own and others’ interests as virtuous or potentially virtuous people, but he does not seem to have said anything to discourage them from making other people suffer.
Moreover, it is far from clear that he could or indeed needed to say anything of that kind. Socrates takes it to be a consequence of his new doctrine that the just person may well be at a disadvantage in worldly terms by not, for instance, taking preemptive action against the unscrupulous. He does not deny (as some pacifists do) the cynical predictions of Polus and the rest about what may happen to the just person; he merely rejects the relevance of those predictions, on the ground that worldly disaster cannot threaten one’s real interests. The good man cannot be harmed. But if that is so, then it is even less clear what is wrong with the old vengeance, or indeed with any form of cruelty or exploitation. If I cannot really harm anyone’s interests by attacking their bodies or their possessions, what is wrong with doing so? It looks as though the most that we can say against the old view is that those who seek vengeance are going to be disappointed, because they hope to be more radically horrible to their enemies than, as it turns out, they can be.
Socrates will presumably say that, if we think in these terms, we shall be looking in the wrong direction. What is wrong with exploitation and cruelty lies not in what those things do to the sufferers, but in what they do to the perpetrators. But this does not solve the problem, because if we do not have an adequate account of what is bad about the activities in relation to the victim, we have little idea why they are bad for the perpetrator. At best, the complaint would seem to be of a kind of triviality, as though the cruel were wasting their time with superficial things.
3 INFINITE VALUE
Rather than thinking in political terms, of regulating and normalizing the responses demanded by the old rules and creating an impersonal power to control them, the Socratic approach tries to transcend those responses altogether, by appealing to a different order of value and a different understanding of people’s deepest interests. In this, it resembles Christianity, and the difficulties that we have just glimpsed have indeed been shared by some kinds of Christianity, for instance of a Gnostic character, which placed the significance of human life so radically beyond its worldly operations as to leave it quite mysterious why what happens in the worldly dimension should matter at all. Christianity labored hard, notably in the person of Augustine, to give an answer to that question, and it was helped to do so by a doctrine of history, an account of why God should have an interest in a finite world. Even given those resources, it remained a constant source of tension in Christianity, whether it was the aim of its special truth to transform the secular world, or merely to redeem it.
Socratism generated a similar problem, with fewer resources to deal with it. Vlastos was surely right in holding that Socrates did not want to accept the most extreme conclusions about the worthlessness of worldly things, that he did not agree with Antisthenes and the Cynics in thinking that all non-moral goods were indifferent. Socrates thought it better to be healthy rather than sick, in the company of friends rather than friendless, free of bodily pain rather than in agony. So how is it that the good man cannot be harmed? If we say, as Vlastos does in the article from which I started, 11 that for Socrates virtue had infinite value, and non-moral goods only finite value, we are still left with the question of what attitudes adequately acknowledge those respective values. How can we avoid the conclusion that a subtraction of non-moral goods is either no loss at all, because it is a subtraction from an infinite sum, or else a loss that we have reason to fear, because it is a subtraction from a finite sum that we reasonably care about? We are also still left with the problem we have already encountered, about the content of the virtues that have infinite value—a content that is directed almost entirely to protecting other people’s possession of finite goods.
Socrates surely did think that non-moral goods had some value, and that their loss constituted some loss. The sense in which the good man cannot be harmed has to be that he cannot ultimately be harmed. But Thrasymachus, Callicles, and their less theoretical associates can press Socrates painfully on what ultimately means. In the long run, as Maynard Keynes used to remind people, we are all dead. Unless, of course, we are not: and it is hard to resist the conclusion that this aspect of Socratic doctrine can make sense only if it is completed, as it was by Plato and by Christianity, with a belief that this is not the only or the most important life we lead.12 Under those auspices, the negotiations between finite and infinite can take on another aspect, one that leaves behind the bleak truth underlying the old rules, that these are the only life and the only friends that we shall ever have.
We have seen two ways of going beyond the old rule. One is the political way, of regulating enmity and replacing its exchanges by impersonal authority. This is a way that all societies, to various degrees and with varying success, try to take. Another way, which Socrates proposed, was to transcend enmity and its relations altogether, and I have suggested that at the level at which Socrates seemingly wanted to pursue it, this path leads intelligibly only to metaphysics and religion, a transcendence of finite life altogether. But it may be thought that there is a third, and strictly ethical, way of going beyond the old rule. This agrees with the old dispensation that there is only one life, but enjoins, as a beneficial way of living it, that one should never hate anyone, and should encourage in oneself only positive sentiments. Paganism itself found resources for limiting the indulgences of hatred or the enjoyment of others’ suffering, 13 and more generally for controlling the destructive and obsessional emotions of hatred and the desire to hurt. Such projects of ethical education and of self-management are still very much with us, and there is good reason why they should be. But should they try to exclude drasanti pathein entirely?
Here we need a distinction. The trigerôn muthos* of the Choephoroi said that blow for blow was demanded (it was this demand that was controlled and redirected by public institutions). But there is a different thought, that disagreeable or unhelpful conduct towards a particular person is not indeed demanded of me, and if I act against him I shall not be acting in the role of an agency of justice, but nevertheless it may be allowed in view of what he has done, to me or to my friends. That last possibility brings in an important consideration. Socrates and others seeking to overcome the old rule have been agreeably less disposed to get rid of its first clause than its second; they have little objection to one’s being nice to one’s friends, unless it involves the corruption of some process demanded by justice. But by the transitivities of friendship and enmity, which can work such chaos when friendship provides the basic protection system14 and which still operate to some extent even when it does not do so, my support for my friends may well involve my being less than friendly to those who have behaved badly towards them.
But need this involve harming those people—harming them even in the less spectacular ways that are still available when many ways of harming them have been fortunately taken away by the law? We have to ask, once again, what counts as harm. ‘Being less than friendly’ requires some expression, and certainly it is not enough of an expression of it that one should be, simply, less friendly. Being less friendly to someone than I am to my friends is, in itself, simply treating him like everyone else; it is certainly not adequate to register the special fact that I and my friends have got something against him.
The problems raised by this are real, but not in themselves philosophical. A problem of principle does arise, however, if we want there to be a universal sentiment that can be called, as Christians have called it, love. If love, or anything that could collect such a name, is what we should feel for everyone, then there is no way in which one can fall below that level of concern without failing in a required virtue, even when it is a matter of what one should feel towards those who have behaved badly towards oneself or one’s particular friends. There are only two ways out from that position. One is that one should have no particular friends, including oneself. The other is that towards people who have behaved badly in relation to oneself or one’s friends one should feel and act in ways that are less than (particularly) friendly, but that one should do so specifically in the interests of charity: to do those people a good turn. This state of mind has a familiar psychology and, we can now perhaps see, an interesting history. It takes the archaic idea that expressions of enmity are legitimated in the name of justice, and the Socratic idea that in applying justice to someone I must be benefiting him, and combines the two in a way that achieves, with an awesome dialectical horribleness, the worst of two worlds.
The conclusion must be neither Socratic nor Christian. The old rule has to be tamed and directed, both politically and psychologically, rather than metaphysically transcended or transmuted into universal agapê.
1 Archaiognosia 1, 2 (1980).
2 In using the expression ‘Socratic outlook’, I am laying aside the questions, discussed by Vlastos, of the extent to which Socrates himself originated these changes. For possible antecedents see Albrecht Dihle, Die Goldene Regel (Göttingen 1962), pp. 45–8, and Mary Whitlock Blundell, Helping Friends and Harming Enemies (Cambridge 1989), p. 56, to whom I owe the Dihle reference.
3 I have developed the argument that follows at greater length in Shame and Necessity (California U.P. 1993), ch. 5.
4 What is perhaps the best known of these comments is still regularly ascribed to the comic writer Philemon, of the 4th century BC, but this is a mistake: for details, see Shame and Necessity, pp. 202–3, note 19. The author and date of the famous verses are unknown.
5 The verb antadikein is a Platonic coinage, first occurring in the Crito.
6 A passage cited by Vlastos from Euripides [Ion 1046 seq] says that it is a fine thing for those in good fortune to honor eusebeia [piety, reverence—Ed.], but no law stands in the way of those who want to treat their enemies badly. Eusebeia always refers to a specifically religious type of requirement; it is not clear how the remark (made by an aged paidagogos) relates to justice.
* Dikê and dikaion mean “justice”; drasanti pathein means “The doer should suffer what he has done.” These phrases, along with trigerôn muthos (“the age-old maxim”) p. 80 below, come from Aeschylus, Choephoroi (Libation-Bearers) 306–14. —Ed.
7 Thucydides also, interestingly, gets Cleon to say in the Mytilinean debate [3.40.3] ‘pity is justly returned to people who are similar [tous homoious] but not to those who do not show pity in return, and who necessarily are in the position of being enemies’. Classen well argues on the strength of the last clause that homoious should mean ‘in a similar situation’ rather than ‘like-minded’. But the previous clause does suggest ‘like-minded’, and, when one recalls that the necessity in question was applied by the Athenians themselves, the slip-page between the two senses provides a compact rhetorical demonstration of the move from the justice associated with the traditional rule to that invoked in the Melian dialogue.
8 Lys. 1.4, 7.20, al.; Dem. 21.28, 22.3, al.; Whitlock Blundell, p. 54.
9 These questions are related to a more general point, that it is a mistake to think that ethical conceptions typical of the archaic age were more narcissistic than those associated with Platonic or, again, modern morality. I discuss this in Shame and Necessity, ch. 4 and Endnote 1.
10 Vlastos himself, in the period when he was publicly identified with Christianity, believed passionately that it should transform it. In his book Christian Faith and Democracy (New York 1939) he tells how a friend of his, ‘a decent pagan, asked: “Why are you a Christian?” I replied: “Because I believe in love.” ’ Vlastos explains how uneasy he felt with this reply in the face of social inequality, the ‘impassable barrier’ between rich and poor. No one had made it. ‘But it is there. And as long as we let it stand, faith in love will lack the substance of action, and no one can profess it without a measure of hypocrisy.’[pp. 40, 42.]
11 He takes a different view in his book Socrates, based on a distinction between the conditional and the unconditional.
12 On Socrates facing death, see Vlastos, Socrates, pp. 233–5; Shame and Necessity, pp. 184–5, note 60.
13 Already in the Odyssey Eurycleia is told not to gloat [22.411]. Similar ideas at Lys. 2.8, Ar. Nub. 549 seq, Democr. DK 68 B 293, Herod. 4.205; and Diogenes Laertius ascribes to Pittacus and to Solon [1.76, 1.54] sayings to the effect that forgiveness is better than revenge: Whitlock Blundell, p. 56.
* Cf. footnote p. 74 above. —Ed.
14 Whitlock Blundell, discussing this [p. 48], points out that it led to extended networks, particularly in conjunction with the further friendship relation of xenia: she mentions the example of Axylos [Il. 6. 14–16] who had many friends, ‘because he lived by the road.’
FIVE
Introduction to Plato’s Theaetetus
Like all of Plato’s dialogues, the Theaetetus presents a conversation that did not actually take place. The dialogue form is not meant to give an historical record; it is a style of writing that enables Plato to explore philosophical questions in ways more vivid and more intellectually flexible than are available to a treatise. Above all, the dialogue form enables Plato not to speak in his own person. The leading figure in the dialogues, except for some of the last that he wrote, is Plato’s teacher Socrates. The ideas which Socrates expresses in the dialogues, or helps to construct in conversation with the other characters, are not necessarily ideas that were known to the historical Socrates, and in many of the dialogues, including the Theaetetus, the materials of the discussion are quite certainly Plato’s.
Questions are raised not only by Socrates’ presence, but also by Plato’s absence. We should not assume that there is a straightforward route from any given dialogue to Plato’s beliefs. We are used to the idea that philosophers have theories or even systems, which they lay before us in articles or monographs. Reading Plato’s dialogues, we may easily think that they are just a literary device for putting across opinions which he might, if he wished, have expressed more directly. There are a few dialogues of which that is a fair description; in some the form of dialogue is almost abandoned. But the very fact that in some cases Plato is clearly talking to us through the dialogue should make us question the assumption that he is always doing so.
Hardly anyone now thinks that all Plato’s dialogues, or all except the earliest, express the same theory, roughly that of the Republic. Most people accept that Plato developed, questioned, and even perhaps changed his theories. But we still need to guard against the idea that every time Plato wrote a dialogue he was acting as curator of his own system, keeping it in place or monitoring its developments. Plato certainly had some systematic beliefs, and still more some guiding metaphysical and ethical concerns, which are variously and powerfully expressed in his work. He has always been regarded as one of the greatest Western philosophers, by some people as the greatest of them all. Notwithstanding the achievements of his remarkable predecessors whose writings are lost to us (several are mentioned in this dialogue), he virtually invented the subject, philosophy. He was the first to express many distinctively philosophical questions and concerns; in the Theaetetus, he explores in an intense and closely argued way ideas which have shaped the ways in which people have subsequently discussed what knowledge might be, and whether we can have any. But as well as explicit philosophical content, Plato lays before us in his dialogues various attitudes which also belong to philosophy, such as curiosity, puzzlement, and intellectual surprise. His characters may be excited, bored, confused, or impressed; they take up, in such moods, all sorts of analogies, metaphors, stories, and models (for instance, of the human mind); they learn something from them, and often then throw them away. The dialogues, very often, embody these processes of inquiry—they do not merely present, in coded form, its results. If we are going to get the most from reading one of Plato’s dialogues, we have to keep in close touch with its tone, sustaining a sense of what is a joke, what is merely provisional, what is being tried out or tried on.
The Theaetetus is a dialogue to which this advice particularly applies. Socrates reiterates a theme familiar from Plato’s earliest dialogues, that he himself knows nothing, and that he is merely there to discuss and criticize other people’s ideas, and to help them formulate them; it is here that, in a famous image, he compares his role to that of a midwife (150). On its central question, ‘what is knowledge?’, the dialogue’s results are negative, but it is not supposed that we have learned nothing in disposing of the various answers which are proposed in the course of the argument. Moreover, the various answers themselves, as we shall see, are not merely suggestions randomly elicited by the question. They speak to various important preconceptions, and they help to identify theoretical problems which will have to be faced in any later discussion of knowledge.
Many scholars have assumed that there is definite doctrine to be gathered from between the lines of the dialogue. Partly, this is because it is agreed that the dialogue was written after the Phaedo, the Symposium, and the Republic, with their ambitious metaphysical speculations about a changeless order of ‘Forms’ separate from the world of ordinary material happening, and it is felt that the Theaetetus must have something to say about those matters since it concerns knowledge (which in the Republic is confined to the Forms), and indeed seems to express in the Digression (172–177) some of the same attitudes to philosophy, contrasted with the world of practical affairs, as are to be found in these dialogues. Indeed, there is a reading of the first and longest Part of the dialogue, discussing the idea that knowledge is perception, which represents the argument of that Part as relying on the kind of view of the material world that is to be found in the Republic.
Whether we accept that reading or not, we should not assume that because there are theoretical commitments in the offing and Plato here refers to various philosophical theories, the dialogue is all the time trying to get some doctrine across to us, as opposed to making us think about the issues. Moreover, as Myles Burnyeat has said:
. . . readers of the Theaetetus are required to contribute more and more as the dialogue proceeds. As I see it, your task in Part I is to find the meaning in the text and follow the argument to a satisfactory conclusion. In Part II you are challenged to respond to the meaning in the text by overcoming the problems and paradoxes that it leaves unresolved. In Part III the task is nothing less than to create from the text a meaning which will solve the problem of knowledge.
The three Parts of the dialogue discuss, at very different lengths, three different suggestions for what knowledge is: that it is perception, that it is true judgement, and that it is true judgement together with ‘an account’. Before the first of these ideas is taken up and submitted to a long examination, Socrates helps to set up the inquiry with a demand for a general account of the notion in question: It is no good giving, as Theaetetus first does, a list of kinds of knowledge, because that will not tell us what makes those things kinds of knowledge. When Socrates makes this demand, as he does in several other Platonic dialogues, it is often objected by modern critics that, for many of our notions, there is no reason to suppose that we can give a definition which captures their various applications. In trying to understand the ways in which many different things can be called a ‘game’, for instance, or a ‘machine’, or ‘honest’, or ‘natural’, it is unlikely that we shall get far by looking for the kind of neat formula that pairs ‘vixen’ with ‘female fox’. Why should we expect there to be one for knowledge? The general point is well taken. But, equally, there is good reason to wonder whether Socrates, at least in this dialogue, is really looking for such a formula. The first suggestion offered by Theaetetus and taken up for discussion is that knowledge is perception, and this is certainly not a definitional formula. For one thing, Socrates makes it quite clear later on (165d) that it is not to be tested by merely considering whether ‘perceive’ and related terms can be substituted for ‘know’: It will not count against the proposal, for instance, that one can be said to see or hear dimly or faintly, but not to know something dimly or faintly. Moreover, it is immediately obvious that an identification of knowledge with perception will not fit the examples of knowledge that came up when Theaetetus was assembling a list. Those were all cases of a skill or a kind of expertise, and they are not kinds of perception. Indeed, the relations of expertise to knowledge as perception will turn out, rather later in Part I, to be altogether problematic.
The list is rejected for a more general reason, that it will not give any insight into the nature of knowledge. The idea that knowledge is perception is worth considering as possibly giving insight (though not if it is treated simply as a definition). Socrates examines the idea by working it up into a theory. First he says (151e) that Theaetetus’ suggestion is what used to be maintained by Protagoras, a famous teacher who was a contemporary of Socrates and who appears in one of Plato’s most brilliant dialogues, which bears his name. Protagoras claimed that ‘man is the measure of all things’, a saying which is here taken to mean that each man is the measure of the things that are for him: in the sense that if, for instance, one person finds the wind cold and another finds it warm, the right thing to say is that the wind is cold for the one and is warm for the other. If we say this, relativizing the statement made by each person to his or her own perception, neither person can be wrong. There is no room for error, since no claim is being made beyond what later philosophy was to call the ‘immediate experience’ of each person. Indeed, it is wrong to imply that there is any such thing as the state of the wind in itself. Protagoras’ thought is that the wind is cold for one person and warm for another, and that is all there is to it. We may say in ordinary speech that the wind is ‘really’ warm, but that is at best a statistical judgement, to the effect that it is warm for more people than not. (There is an important question, to which we shall come back, whether Protagoras, sticking to his preferred forms of speech, can in fact make those statistical claims.)
From this, it is an easy step—one needs to ask, when reading the dialogue, how easy a step it is—to saying that everything which really happens can be reported simply by statements of immediate experience: Everything that is, in any sense, is for some individual. Individuals themselves, moreover, exist only as participants in these perceptual encounters. Understood in this way, Protagoras’ doctrine turns out to be a version of the theory associated with Heracleitus (a philosopher who flourished around 500 B.C., whose work survives only in obscure but often deeply impressive fragments), that ‘everything is in flux’: nothing is anything without qualification. So Socrates is able to say (160d) that three theories come to the same thing: the view of Heracleitus and others, ‘that all things flow like streams; of Protagoras, wisest of men, that man is the measure of all things; and of Theaetetus that, things being so, knowledge proves to be perception.’ The central problem about the meaning of Part I of the Theaetetus is to decide the sense in which these three things do ‘come to the same thing’.
In the course of reaching this conclusion, Socrates questions the basis on which people conventionally suppose that some of their experiences better tell them how things ‘really’ are than others do: the experiences they have when they are well, for instance, as opposed to those they have when they are sick, or waking experiences rather than those had in dreams. Indeed, most radically, he asks how one can tell whether one is awake or dreaming, and with this question he helped to start a sceptical tradition of questioning which, above all through the influence of Descartes, has continued into modern philosophy.
Developing the Heracleitean aspect of the view, Socrates brings in a theory about ‘slow’ and ‘quick’ motions. A modern critic will want to know whether this is a physical theory—a sort of scientific hypothesis—or, alternatively, a metaphysical model, a vivid way of representing the implications of sticking to Protagorean certainties. This question did not present itself to Plato in quite that form, and it is probably better to leave it to be settled in the light of other interpretative answers one needs to give. Above all, one needs to decide whether Plato brings in the Heracleitean material as something that he himself believes about the material world, or whether it is elicited simply as a consequence of the Protagorean view, itself constructed as offering the only sense in which perception could be knowledge—because immediate perception is the only kind of perception that, like knowledge, has a content which, necessarily, is true. (Plato gives several opportunities to ask whether knowledge and immediate perception do have some such feature in common.) If one takes the second line, the argument that leads to the rejection of the Heracleitean view constitutes a long reductio ad absurdum of Theaetetus’ suggestion. It is not even plausible (this argument will go) that knowledge is perception, unless immediate perception is meant, to which Protagoras’ maxim applies, but if one sticks to what is determined by that maxim, one has a Heracleitean world, and if the world is Heracleitean, no language or thought is possible (181–83).
It may be asked why, on this line, Protagoras has to lead to Heracleitus. Even if the only knowledge lies in the indubitable data of immediate perception—‘hot for me now’—might we not be able to think of enduring things, such as material objects and people, as the objects merely of belief? There is more than one way of approaching that question, but Plato’s outlook on it is probably shaped by an important assumption, one that has been shared in one form or another by many subsequent philosophers: that knowledge must be self-sufficient, and cannot need anything weaker than itself. If Protagoras’ statements offer all the knowledge there is, they cannot presuppose an understanding of the world which rests in mere belief. If Protagorean statements constitute all the knowledge there is, then we must be able to understand the idea that what those statements present as a world is all the world there is.
Before he reaches his eventual refutation of the Heracleitean element, Socrates engages in some complicated maneuvres against the Protagorean element by itself. After rejecting some charges against Protagoras as purely ad hominem, he isolates the powerful objection that Protagoras’ theory cannot account for its own claim to be true; indeed, if others think the theory false, they cannot be wrong in thinking this. (This is one of the first uses of a pattern of argument that has often been used since, by which a philosopher’s theory is applied to itself.) It has been objected that in this argument Socrates falls back on an unrelativized sense of ‘true’ which Protagoras’ theory has eliminated, but that objection raises some deeper questions. Protagoras’ formulae did not rely on deploying a relativized sense of true. What were relativized were the perceptual terms, such as ‘hot’. ‘It is hot is true for me’ got its content by meaning ‘It is hot for me’. In the light of this, Socrates’ objection has force, because it is quite unclear what Protagoras might be doing in asserting things such as a philosophical theory, which cannot be expressed in such terms. He has, for instance, no way of claiming that someone who comes to accept his theory will be replacing false views with true ones.
At this point in the dialogue, it is indeed suggested that Protagoras might dispense with this claim altogether, and say instead that he can help people to replace states of mind that are less nice (for them) with states of mind that will be nicer (for them). But in reply to this, in one of Plato’s most brilliant insights, Socrates points out that any claim to be able to do such a thing involves predictions, and a prediction about future Protagorean certainties cannot itself be a Protagorean certainty: noone possesses a ‘a criterion within himself’ (178c) of what will be, even of what will be for himself. (There has been earlier, at 166b, a suggestion that Protagoras might have more success with statements about the past, reducing memories to present impressions.) In the case of the future (and the same applies, we may add, to those ‘statistical’ questions of how many people are having certain kinds of experience) nothing can eliminate the fact that two people can have conflicting beliefs, and there is nothing such as immediate experience to guarantee that one rather than the other is right. In these cases, unlike that of immediate experience, the parties are symmetrically related to the subject matter of the judgement—for neither of them is it peculiarly ‘his’. It is precisely in such cases that there is room for expertise, and because of this, as Socrates makes clear, the objection against Protagoras, that he destroys his own claims to be wiser than others, is not merely personal rhetoric. Rather, by removing any realm for expertise, he removes one of the most important applications of the notion of knowledge. It begins to look as though, when at the beginning we turned away from kinds of expertise to immediate perceptual experience and its subjective certainties, we may have turned in the wrong direction.
Before we leave the first Part of the dialogue, another argument is offered against the claim that knowledge is perception, independently of the long discussion that ran through Protagoras and Heracleitus. This argument, which again has had an immensely important influence on later philosophy, rests on the idea that each sense can grasp items only of a certain kind, as sight relates to colors, hearing to sounds, and so forth. But knowledge requires concepts that are not tied in this way to any of the senses, concepts such as sameness, difference, and being. By which of the senses could we gather that a sound is something different from a color? Yet this is certainly something we know, and indeed everything we know involves concepts of this nonsensory kind. So knowledge is not perception, and this, at any rate, is something we have come to understand, as Socrates says. There are other things, as well, that we can come to understand in thinking through the long and wonderfully subtle route that has led to this conclusion.
The dialogue now takes a new turn, and Theaetetus offers a different suggestion: that knowledge is true judgement. This suggestion is also refuted, at the end of Part II (200–201), with a very swift argument which is a paradigm of the arguments still used to make this point. Someone may have a true belief about a certain matter, but it may be sheer luck that his belief is true—acquiring it as he did, he might just as well have acquired a false one. If this is so, his true belief does not count as knowledge. This is Plato’s argument, and it is conclusive, even though it is not entirely clear from the example what contrast Plato has in mind between sound and unsound sources of belief. His scene is a law court, in which a lawyer or orator persuades the jury of something which may indeed be true, but where the conditions prevent their coming to a sound judgement on the matter. Does Plato want to emphasize the distinction between firsthand experience, such as an eye-witness might have, and mere secondhand testimony? Or rather the distinction between a thorough argument and a hasty, superficial one? The distinction does not make much difference to the use of the example for this particular purpose. It would make a difference if Plato were to try to develop an account of knowledge by building directly on such examples, as many modern theorists do, but as we shall see, he does not try to do so.
The jury example, which refutes the suggestion that knowledge is true belief, takes only a page at the very end of Part II. Almost all of the Part is devoted to a preliminary question, whether there can be such a thing as false judgement. Two lines of argument are introduced to suggest that false judgement may be impossible. One of them (188–89) is to the effect that false judgement must involve ‘thinking what is not’, which is hard to distinguish from thinking nothing, which, in turn, must be equivalent to not thinking at all. This kind of argument is not pursued in the Theaetetus, but is discussed at length in its successor dialogue, the Sophist; so, too, are the views of Parmenides and others already mentioned (180–81, 183–84), who held that everything is, in some sense, one, and that there can be no change or difference in the world. The Sophist displays, among other things, Plato’s insight that these two issues, of falsehood and of change, are closely related to one another, and that both demand a close examination of ideas of ‘being’.
The Theaetetus itself pursues only the other of the two problems about false judgement which it mentions, one that centers on the idea of taking, or mistaking, one thing for another. The argument is that this must be impossible. One cannot make a mistake about something one does not know (how could one even think of it?), and from this it follows that one cannot mistake two things one does not know for each other, nor something one does not know for something one knows. But, further, one cannot mistake for each other two things one knows, since this would be enough to show that one did not know them: If someone could say to himself, and believe it, ‘Theaetetus is Theodorus’, then he would literally not know what he was talking about. But of everything it is true that either one knows it or one does not know it, so these are all the conceivable combinations; so nothing can be mistaken for anything else. The upshot of the argument, in effect, is that it is a necessary condition of mistaking two items for one another that one should know them both, but this is also a sufficient condition of knowing them apart—that is to say, of not mistaking them.
Faced with this puzzle, Socrates introduces a possibility which helps the discussion to make a little progress. The assumptions of the argument are not quite true, because one may mistake something one perceives for something one knows, and the thing or person one perceives may be either known or unknown to one. Thus I may take someone I see in the distance for Theaetetus, who is known to me, and the person I see may in fact be someone else I know, such as Theodorus, or it may be a stranger. In such a case, I can make a mistake. Socrates works out all (or almost all) the possibilities that this new idea permits, illustrating it with a model of the mind as a wax block which takes and preserves images of items one has previously perceived. (The wax block is here a model just of memory, and not, as it became in later philosophy, of perception.)When I later perceive something, I may fit that perception to an image on my Block, and in this process there lies the possibility of mistake.
However, this model cannot be enough. We can make mistakes about things that are not perceived at all. Thus someone who asks what seven and five add up to may, if he is bad at arithmetic, think that the answer is eleven rather than twelve, and this mistake cannot be explained in terms of the Block. So a second model is introduced, of an aviary or birdcage As one acquires knowledge of the numbers, one comes to possess, as it were, birds of knowledge which enter the cage of the mind. Seeking the answer to a given question, one tries to grasp the right bird, and one may grasp the wrong one, as the person does who thinks that eleven, rather than twelve, is what seven and five add up to.
With the Aviary, Plato introduces a distinction which is very important to the theory of knowledge, between dispositional knowledge and knowledge in action, represented by the model in terms of merely possessing a bird in the cage as opposed to holding it in one’s hand. This distinction (which was later expressed by Aristotle in terms of having knowledge and using it) is useful, but it does not solve the present problem. If there is a puzzle of how one can take one thing one knows for another thing one knows, it arises just as much with the birds in the model—the Aviary has simply replaced one mistake with another. It is no help, either, to add to the Aviary, as Theaetetus rather desperately suggests, ‘pieces of ignorance’: That raises the same problem again, and some others as well.
Scholars have wondered how the Block and the Aviary are to be reconciled with things that Plato says elsewhere about knowledge, perception, and our grasp of arithmetic. These worries are pointless. The models are designed to deal with a specific question, and we should concentrate on the aspects of them that are relevant to that question. Thus ‘having in one’s aviary the bird that is the knowledge of eleven’ merely represents the capacity to think of the number eleven, and we need not bother here with such matters as the metaphysical status of numbers. We are left with enough questions, even when we leave aside the irrelevant ones, and each of the models has given rise to much discussion. With the Aviary, for instance, are birds corresponding to seven and to five involved in the mistake that Socrates describes? Is there a separate bird labelled ‘the sum of seven and five’? The best answer to these questions seems to be that only birds corresponding to eleven and to twelve are mentioned, and Plato leaves us with the unsolved problem of how one of them can be mistaken for the other, as it seems it must be if ‘eleven’ is thought to answer the question ‘What are seven and five?’.
A question that needs to be considered is whether Plato intends to leave us with any positive result from the Wax Block. Does it make a contribution to understanding mistakes that involve perception, and fail only to the extent that it cannot explain others? Or does its failure to explain others mean that it gives too shallow a view even of the mistakes involving perception? Here we must bear in mind that our expectations of a theory to deal with these matters are different from Plato’s. Modern philosophy thinks of these as semantic problems, concerned with the correct understanding of thoughts such as ‘The sum of seven and five is eleven’ or ‘The man I can see over there is Theaetetus’; we are concerned with the ways in which reference to a given item may be secured by different expressions. If we expect a semantic theory, we shall probably think that the Block gives us no more help than the Aviary. Plato indeed says that we should consider thought processes in terms of speech that the soul conducts with itself, a fruitful line of inquiry which he takes further in the Sophist. But the distinctions deployed in the Block and the Aviary—unlike some of those made in the Sophist—do not belong to semantic theory, and there is no direct relation between semantic conceptions and processes mentioned in the models: There is no suggestion, for instance, that when I think ‘The man I can see is Theaetetus’, what I mean is ‘My present perception of a man fits my memory of Theaetetus’. Rather, the idea is that the process of having the thought involves my fitting the perception to my memory. Plato tries to proceed by distinguishing perceptual and nonperceptual ways of grasping, or getting at, an item—a distinction which, disastrously, has no analogue when we get to the Aviary.
How exactly the distinction between ‘ways of grasping’ is supposed to help with the problems, and how exactly it relates to what would now be discussed as semantic problems of reference, are questions that deserve careful consideration. We need to ask, too, why Plato is so concerned here with questions of mistaken identity. A simple answer is that this is the puzzle he has chosen to discuss here, a puzzle expressed in terms of taking one thing for another; later, in the Sophist, he will turn to descriptive falsehood, such as that involved in saying that Theaetetus is flying when he is in fact sitting. But Plato’s concentration in the Theaetetus on identity mistakes does not come only from the puzzle he happens to have set himself. It relates, rather, to a radical discovery which Plato had made, and which resonates through the later part of the Theaetetus and in the Sophist: that knowledge is necessary for error.
In his earlier work, Plato had tended to assimilate error to ignorance Ignorance, not knowing about something, can be seen as simply the negation of knowledge. In the case of expertise or a skill, ignorance is, basically, a void, the lack of the appropriate knowledge; equally, with ignorance of particular items, not to know of something is to have no thought about it. The Republic, in particular, in its dealings with knowledge, is overwhelmingly concerned with two topics, the kinds of skill that distinguish the rulers from the other classes in the city, and the distinctive subject matters to which various states of mind, and various studies, such as philosophy and mathematics, are addressed. Neither of these concerns is well designed to bring out distinctions between ignorance and error. The Theaetetus and the Sophist, on the other hand, address the fundamental point that error is not only different from mere ignorance, but, in a certain way, excludes it. I can make a mistake about something only if I know it, or know something about it, or know enough about it for my false belief to be a belief about that thing. These requirements could only seem very puzzling, until Plato took the first steps towards making them clear. Those steps required him to ask what it was that one needed to know in order to be in a position to make a mistake, and this naturally led first to problems about misidentification.
This concentration carries over into Part III, where the proposal is taken up that knowledge may be true belief together with a logos—an ‘account’, as we may best translate this very versatile word. Part III is the most compressed, and in some ways the most problematical, part of the dialogue, and the first problem which has to be faced is that it never discusses what, as we may be inclined to think, it should be discussing. The proposal in terms of an ‘account’ immediately follows the example of the jury, which straightforwardly refutes, as we saw earlier, the conception of knowledge as merely true judgement. Knowledge and true judgement cannot be the same thing, says Socrates (201c). ‘That’s just what I once heard a man say, ’ Theaetetus replies, ‘he said that true judgement with an account is knowledge.’ After this, we would expect the dialogue to pursue the kind of ‘account’ that could have turned the jurors’ true belief into knowledge—their being able to offer a more reliable basis of such a belief, perhaps, such as that available to an eye-witness, or their being able to rehearse the details in a consistent way and to give good explanations in the face of objections (such considerations had indeed put in an appearance in a much earlier dialogue, the Meno). But nothing of this sort follows: The ‘man’s’ proposal is elaborated in terms of a ‘dream’ recounted by Socrates, of a very abstract theory which seeks to construct knowable complexes from unknowable elements. The jury example serves as a transition to a discussion which does not pursue such examples, but rather reverts to a more basic level and seeks a better understanding of what it is to know a certain thing, to have a grasp of it. This contributes in itself to finding out what knowledge is, but it also has a broader theoretical relation to the puzzling conclusion which has emerged, that error presupposes knowledge.
The Dream has been much discussed, and scholars are not entirely agreed on the extent to which it refers to the theories of any specific thinker, as well as differing about its exact interpretation. More generally, critics have been puzzled by the extremely unspecific nature of the model: We are told nothing about the kinds of elements or wholes involved. However, the lesson to be drawn from the discussion is perhaps so general that it does not matter what the unspecified elements might be. The lesson is that there is going to be a systematic difficulty with any proposal to the effect that knowledge of a certain item should be explained in terms of an analysis into unknowable elements (202e). Exploiting some claims—seemingly very dubious—about the relations between notions such as ‘whole’, ‘sum’, and ‘totality’, Socrates is able to argue that either the complex is a knowable whole which must have knowable parts, or, alternatively, if the supposed parts or elements really are unknowable, then they cannot be parts of a complex at all. These arguments may seem specious, but once more we must bear in mind what they are supposed to do. Relations of part and whole puzzled Plato, as they did other Greek thinkers, but here he is undoubtedly clear that there is a difference between the complex or ‘syllable’, S-followed-by-O, and the mere pair of items, S and O. He is also aware that you can spell the syllable SO, but you cannot spell the letter S. His point, rather, is that spelling cannot be an adequate analogy to knowing: However exactly wholes are constructed of parts, knowable wholes cannot be constructed of unknowable parts. We must remember all the time the challenging requirement which has now emerged, that one must know a thing if one is to have a true or false belief about it. It follows from this that each of a set of letters (or any other such elements) will have to be known, if one is to believe of it that, together with the others, it forms a given complex; but, according to the Dream’s account, this is exactly what someone will have to believe of each element, if he is to know the complex.
After rejecting the theory of the Dream, Socrates turns back to consider, more generally, what ‘an account’ might be. He lays aside the sense in which it means ‘an expression of thought’, for the obvious reason that true belief itself can receive such an expression—this cannot be what turns belief into knowledge. Two further candidates each raise, in turn, a very general difficulty of principle. One goes back to the sort of idea offered in the Dream, that an ‘account’ of a whole is to be given by listing its parts, and raises another problem, independent of the special point (about the parts being themselves unknowable) which has already been made against the Dream. If someone gives a correct enumeration of parts, we can always raise the question whether he knew that this was a correct enumeration of them, or whether (for instance) he got it right by luck. So we shall have to say that knowing a thing, or what a thing is, involves having a correct conception of it and knowing its composition in terms of its parts; and this gets us no further with an account of knowledge. If, last of all, it is proposed that the ‘account’ of a particular thing which will give us knowledge of it is to be found in a grasp of its distinguishing characteristics, of what marks it off from other things, we run into a difficulty very directly related to those raised by the Block and the Aviary: unless one grasps a thing’s distinguishing characteristics, so that one can tell it from other things, one cannot even think of it, and so cannot get as far as having any conception of it at all, even one that falls short of knowledge.
The arguments of Part III make no secret of the fact that they leave much to be discussed. But the third Part is like the second, which more explicitly spells out its difficulties, and also like the first, which extensively deploys a complex argument, to the extent that they all belie the formally negative conclusion of the dialogue. We do not know at the end of it what knowledge is, but we understand better than we did at the beginning what might be involved in knowing what knowledge is. Thanks to a discussion which, even by Plato’s standards, is exceptionally rich, inventive, and profound, we have been alerted to basic and very general problems not only in understanding knowledge, but in grasping what true or false belief might be, and what it is to think about a particular thing, whether correctly or incorrectly.
Plato says in the Republic that the dialectician, the person who pursues philosophy, is one who ‘sees things together’. The Theaetetus, though it is one of the most analytical of Plato’s dialogues and also, superficially, one of the more discontinuous in its argument, has a remarkable power to help to do just that.
BRIEF BIBLIOGRAPHY
The major commentaries on the Theaetetus are all in English. The revised version of M. J. Levett’s translation included in this volume was first published, together with a more extensive introduction, in Myles Burnyeat, The Theaetetus of Plato (Indianapolis: 1990).
A commentary on the Greek text will be found in
Lewis Campbell, The Theaetetus of Plato, with a revised text and English notes, 2nd edition (Oxford: 1883).
The following are commentaries on other English translations, which the reader may find it useful to compare with Miss Levett’s.
Francis Macdonald Cornford, Plato’s Theory of Knowledge. The Theaetetus and the Sophist of Plato translated with a commentary (London: 1935).
John McDowell, Plato: Theaetetus. Translated with notes (Oxford: 1973).
A study of the dialogue without translation is David Bostock, Plato’s Theaetetus (Oxford: 1988).
More general books on Plato that contain substantial discussions of the Theaetetus include
W. G. Runciman, Plato’s Later Epistemology (Cambridge: 1962).
Kenneth M. Sayre, Plato’s Analytic Method (Chicago & London: 1969).
Nicholas P. White, Plato on Knowledge and Reality (Indianapolis: 1976).
There are many articles that throw light on particular aspects of the dialogues. The reader who wants to take the discussion further should consult the helpful list given by Myles Burnyeat in The Theaetetus of Plato, pages 243–48.
1 In his introduction to Miss Levett’s translation, Burnyeat calls this Reading A, as opposed to another, Reading B, which understands the use of the “flux” material in this section as part of a long reductio ad absurdum, not something that Plato himself believes about the material world. Burnyeat, very carefully laying out the alternatives, leaves the decision between them (or yet another) to the reader. Anyone who wants to arrive at a serious conclusion about the meaning of the dialogue should work his or her way through Burnyeat’s invaluable discussion of the arguments, both here and throughout the dialogue.
The present, very much shorter, Introduction is indebted at several points to his, while both have their origins in past discussions which he and I have had about the dialogue.The quotation in the following paragraph is from the Preface to his Introduction, pp.xii–xiii. See Myles Burnyeat, The Theaetetus of Plato, with text translated by M. J. Levett, revised by Myles Burnyeat (Hackett: Indianapolis & Cambridge, 1990).
SIX
Plato against the Immoralist
Plato continually confronted ethical sceptics of various kinds; in their most radical form they may perhaps be called, if rather anachronistically, “immoralists”. Such characters typically offer a theoretical position in favour of thinking that self-interested and exploitative strategies are rational and that an attachment to ethical values such as justice is not, except perhaps for some instrumental or second-best reason.
In Athens at the end of the 5th century BC, in the time of Plato’s youth, there was a current of thought to the effect that the values of the older generation had not been transmitted to its children, who had lost confidence in their fathers’, and perhaps any, ethical code. It is a familiar theme in Aristophanes, and it is explicit, in relation to that time, in more than one Platonic dialogue, notably in the observation central to the argument of the Meno, that worthy men such as Thucydides son of Melesias had sons who turned out badly (Men. 92 seq.). Similar ideas, in relation to public morality, came from the reflection that whatever the aspirations of Periclean democracy at home, it kept the empire together by ruthless and unprincipled means.
Whatever the historical sources of his concern, it is true that Plato considers such theories with a seriousness and urgency which have few parallels in the history of philosophy besides Machiavelli and Nietzsche. The seriousness with which Plato regards the immoralists comes out, revealingly, in the fact that he is prepared to regard a remarkably wide range of positions as immoralist. Correspondingly, he makes very exacting demands on any account of ethics that can hope to answer those positions. In reacting to the challenge of the immoralists, he is not satisfied with an account of ethics which merely meets, more or less, our everyday demands on the ethical life, and provides some motive for people, under normal conditions, to live that life. That is what Glaucon and Adeimantus offer in Book II of the Republic, and Plato finds it as unsatisfactory as Thrasymachus’ manifestly immoralist view. It is important to ask exactly why he does so. In particular, it is important to answer this question if we are to understand what Plato is seeking when he moves the search for justice from the individual to the city.
Thrasymachus had said in Book I that justice was “the advantage of the stronger” (338c). This was not offered as a logos or definition of justice: if it were, it would lead to the conclusion that since the stronger certainly pursues his own advantage, he must pursue justice, which Thrasymachus of course denies. Closer to what he principally wants to say is his later statement (343c) that justice is an allotrion agathon, something that always does somebody else some good. Thrasymachus’ own account operates at the very primitive level of dividing agents (whether they be individual people or cities) into two types, the strong and the weak, and identifying justice simply as a device used by the strong to exploit the weak. This immediately raises the question of what makes one agent stronger than another. In particular, what makes a collective agent, such as a city or a group of bandits, strong? Indeed, what makes it a collective agent at all? The answer, as Socrates points out at 351 ff., must be, to a significant degree, the practice of justice between the individuals who form the collective agent. So Thrasymachus’ primitive model must be wrong.
This implies, further, that we cannot go on saying simply that justice “always does someone else some good”. Thrasymachus himself, when he said this, did not mean that the only benefits secured by any just act were benefits to someone other than the agent. He did not deny that when the weaker party acts in accordance with justice, he secures a benefit for himself; he claimed that when this is so, it is only because of power possessed by someone else who is stronger and who also gains a benefit. Justice is always in someone else’s interest, because when an agent has an interest in doing some just act, it is always (leaving aside errors, which are discussed at 339 seq.) because it is in someone else’s interest that this itself should be so.
However, not even this much will be true, once we accept that justice helps to make collective agents strong. In place of Thrasymachus’ view, that justice is a device used by the strong to exploit the weak, we have the idea put forward by Glaucon in Book II, that it is a device of the (individually) weak to make themselves (collectively) strong—to make themselves stronger, in fact, than those who, before this association, were individually strong. On this account, Thrasymachus’ first formulation, that justice is the interest of the stronger, might be replaced with an equally crude slogan to the effect that it is the interest of the weaker. When the association of the (previously) weak is formed, and the collective agent comes into being, justice does each of the participants some good in a way that does not depend on its doing some other, exploiting, party some good.
Expressed in these terms, Thrasymachus’ and Glaucon’s accounts seem to be opposed to one another. It is not simply that they can easily be formulated in terms that are contrary to one another: the opposition may seem to us to extend to their ethical value. The Thrasymachean account, to the extent that it can be made coherent at all, is fiercely reductive and “unmasks” justice as an exploitative device. Glaucon’s theory, on the other hand, is the ancestor of honourable contractualist accounts which show why justice is the basis of collective endeavours and the division of labour, and why it is of great value to human beings.
Granted these differences, it is significant that every party to the discussion in the Republic treats Glaucon’s position (and its elaboration by Adeimantus) as essentially a somewhat refined version of Thrasymachus’.“I shall renew Thrasymachus’ argument”, Glaucon says (358b–c); and Adeimantus, who, like his brother, does not accept this outlook himself but wants to hear it refuted by Socrates, says that he has put as strongly as he can the view of Thrasymachus and others who agree with him (367b). The reason for this is, at one level, obvious. There is an opinion about justice that Thrasymachus on the one hand, and Glaucon and Adeimantus on the other, certainly share, despite their other differences:that the life of justice2 is in some sense a second best. This is the issue that is picked out at the beginning of Book II, when the distinction is made between things that are valued in themselves, things that are valued for their consequences, and things that are valued for both (357–358).3 What Socrates is encouraged to show, contrary to the common opinion which has been expressed in different ways by Thrasymachus and by Glaucon, is that justice falls into the first class. It is obvious that this is the issue, but there is another question to which the answer is rather less obvious: Why should the discussion take this form? Why are the standards for the value of justice raised so high? This is the question I shall take up in the rest of this paper.
The first point to emphasise is how radically individualistic the issue is taken to be. Glaucon’s account might be said to show that we have an interest in pursuing justice, and if we assume that “we” is taken collectively, this is straightforwardly true. Indeed, as we have already seen, granted the collective “we”, justice does not even come out as a second best—without justice there will be no collective “we”. But the collective “we” has a tendency to unravel, and in the discussion with the immoralist, we are not allowed to assume it. The question whether we have reason to pursue justice is taken, by Socrates as it is by the immoralist, to refer to each of us. The question each of us must ask is: “What reason do I have to be just?”; “What does justice do for me?”. This is the force of Socrates’ earlier remark (352d): our discussion is not about a trivial matter, but about how one should live.
The question, then, is about the best life for the individual, and already at 347e Socrates has said that he regards it as an issue “bigger” than Thrasymachus’ first formulations, whether he was right in thinking that the life of the unjust person was better (kreittô; ameinon 358c) than that of the just. A closely related idea is that noone would choose to be just if he had an alternative (“no-one is willingly just”, 360c). The force of this is supposedly given to us by the thought-experiment which Glaucon presents. It is helpful, I suggest, to see Glaucon as presenting two different thought-experiments. The first is that of the ring of invisibility (359d–360)5; the second (360e–361d), that of the contrast between two men, one of whom has all the social rewards of justice without being really just, while the other has genuine justice and none of its conventional rewards.
Glaucon claims (on behalf of Thrasymachus and his associates) that someone armed with Gyges’ ring would act unjustly, as (effectively) an exploitative and self-seeking bandit. An immediate objection to this is that, with regard to many people, it is not very plausible. Even if justice is in some abstract sense a second-best, a contractually acceptable mid-point (359a) between the best option (unpunished self-seeking) and the worst (being the victim of others’ injustice), it is likely, if an ethical system is to work at all, that the motivations of justice will be sufficiently internalized not to evaporate instantaneously if the agent discovers invisibility. Moreover, it is not clear in any case how much such a thought-experiment tells one about justice in real life. What is the precise relation between the two questions: “How would you live if you could become invisible at will?” and “What is the value of justice to you as things actually are?” To try to answer the second of these questions by answering the first, as Glaucon suggests by introducing Gyges’ ring, is to compare reality with fantasy, and that hardly seems a helpful way to address the question of whether and why one wants the life of justice. It is rather like assessing one’s actual sexual happiness by comparing one’s sexual life with pornography.
The second thought-experiment is at least nearer to reality. It is not entirely clear, in fact, what the situation is supposed to be with one of the figures in the contrast, the misunderstood or mistreated man of justice, 6 but the general idea is clear enough, and the contrasted figure, the unjust man who enjoys a reputation of justice, is certainly familiar. One is invited to consider which of these figures one would prefer to be, and to consider this in the light of what one currently thinks about the value of justice. This gives a sharper sense than is given by the story of Gyges’ ring to the question “Do you pursue justice for its own sake or for the sake of the rewards and the reputation that conventionally go with it?”
The question gains in force when we take into account Adeimantus’ contribution. The general effect of that contribution is to reinforce Glaucon’s insistence that we should “take away reputation” (367b), and we may wonder why, at the start of his remarks, Adeimantus says that the argument has not been adequately expressed by Glaucon, and that “what most needed saying has not been said” (362d). His point is that as Glaucon has put it, it is the enemies of justice such as Thrasymachus who emphasise the idea that people pursue justice for the sake of the conventional rewards. On the contrary, Adeimantus says, the real problem is that the friends of justice, people who are trying to encourage the young to be just, themselves emphasise those rewards, and so sell justice short; and he cites passages from the poets to this effect (prefiguring some of the objections that will be brought against them later in the dialogue).
All this, then, gives some sense to the idea of pursuing, and praising, justice “for its own sake”. But now we must ask why Plato thinks it so important that we should value justice in this way. What is the point of insisting that one does not value justice properly unless one values it, in this sense, for its own sake? A modern reader may easily be misled at this point, and take the answer to this question to be more familiar than it is. He or she may take Plato to be thinking of a pure, self-sufficient moral motivation, in terms of which the agent does good or right actions simply because that is what they are, and for no other reason. (The starkest version of such an idea is to be found in Kant, but it takes more forms, and is more generally familiar, than its strictly Kantian expression.) This implies that if one reflects on the value of a moral life, one will insist simply on its moral value: this is what counts as “intrinsic” value, as being concerned with justice and other moral values for their own sake, and it is contrasted with measuring those values against anything else at all, such as one’s own welfare. But this, certainly, is not Plato’s concern. The argument with the immoralist can be formulated only because there is one, univocal, kind of question in practical reason, “How should I live?”, “What is the best life?”, “How shall I do best?”, to which Thrasymachus and his friends give the wrong answer, and Socrates, on behalf of justice, will give the right answer. It is not that the pursuit of justice “for its own sake” has a quite special, moral, value which vindicates itself and cannot in principle be measured by any other sorts of consideration. The question of its value, rather, is the question of what makes a life worth living, a question to which other “non-moral” goods might in principle, as the immoralist suggests, provide the answer.
Another way of putting the point is that the idea of “pursuing justice for its own sake” occurs in Socrates’ answer to the question, not in the question itself. The question is not “What is the value of justice pursued for its own sake, as opposed to the sake of its consequences?”—a question to which the answer is, virtually by definition, “moral value”. The question is: “What is the value of justice?”, and Socrates’ answer is: “It has no value (really), unless it has value when it is pursued for its own sake.” So the question remains: Why does Plato’s Socrates think this? Why does he raise the standards for the vindication of justice so high? Why must it pass the test of being desirable “for its own sake”, in isolation from all social rewards and encouragements?
The answer to this question has an ethical aspect and a political aspect, and in virtue of the analogy between the individual and the city, which plays such an important part in the Republic, they are closely tied to each other. Before we come to the political aspect and to the analogy, however, it will be helpful in understanding the ethical aspect if we look outside the Republic, to the Gorgias.7 This dialogue presents conversations that Socrates has with three speakers, Gorgias, Polus, and Callicles, who take in succession increasingly radical positions. The discussions are structured by the use that is made of three distinct value-oppositions, all of them important to Greek ethical life. One is the contrast between dikaion and adikon, the just and the unjust: this relates, as in the Republic, to values that concern fair dealing with others, respect for their persons and their property, and generally a prohibition on exploiting them.
The terms of the second distinction, kalon and aischron, are harder to translate, and the contrast between them harder to summarize. They can have a purely aesthetic sense, but in their connection with action and character, they relate centrally to dimensions of honour and shame. This is often in Greek thought understood in an external and conventional sense, so that it is a matter of one’s reputation, how one is seen or spoken of, but the values can be more deeply internalized, and the distinction becomes one between things that agents can be proud of, and think well of themselves for having done or been, as opposed to things for which they despise themselves, feel ashamed or embarrassed or contemptible.
The contrast, lastly, between agathon and kakon, good and bad, is often, in the course of the discussion, interpreted in terms of self-interest:one seeks the agathon in seeking what is best for oneself. The basic idea, however, is something rather more general and abstract, the idea of what an agent has good reason to pursue or not. These are the terms which are, throughout these conversations, unquestionably tied to the conclusions of practical reason, and it makes no sense, in this discussion, to say that an agent knows that something is (on balance) kakon, and that he has decided that this is what (on balance) he has reason to pursue.
Gorgias, the first speaker, accepts the conventional idea that all these values go together, so that what is dikaion is also kalon and agathon: we have reason to pursue the just and should think well of ourselves and others for doing so. It is in these terms that he defends his practice of rhetoric. Polus enters the discussion to offer a more radical position, which separates dikaion and agathon: we should stop thinking that the dikaion is what we have reason to do. However, he takes a less radical line with the dimension of kalon and aischron, and is manoeuvred by Socrates into claiming both that to behave unjustly is aischron, and that what is aischron is kakon—that is to say, that we have reason to avoid it.9 This is inconsistent with his attempt to hold that injustice is not kakon.
Polus’ mistake is to sustain at once a conventional link between dikaion and kalon (just behaviour is admired, injustice is something to be ashamed of), and a natural link between kalon and agathon (we have reason to do what will make us admired, no reason to do what will make us ashamed of ourselves). The last speaker, Callicles, sees Polus’ mistake, and takes the further step of denying the conventional link between dikaion and kalon. In doing this, he wants to keep the link between kalon and agathon: the rational person will want to be admired and envied, to think well of himself, and not to be an object of contempt, but he will bring this about, Callicles urges, through power and the exploitation of others, having no concern for considerations of justice.
Callicles is the most brilliantly represented and intimidating of Plato’s immoralists, and it will be disappointing for the friends of the ethical life if Socrates fails to refute him. He is, supposedly, refuted, but it is very easy to feel that Plato, in constructing the discussion, has deliberately dealt Callicles a hand of losing cards. Although there are several complexities in the argument, Callicles effectively ends up (from about Gorg. 491 onwards) defending a crudely gluttonous form of hedonistic activity, which very few are likely to envy. But this was not supposed to be the idea. The immoralist was supposed to be a rather grand, powerful, stylish figure—the aesthetic echoes of kalos are relevant here—whom others, if they were honest, could admire and envy; but he has ended up, in Socrates’ refutation, as a low addict or at best a heartlessly boring bon viveur, whom anyone with any taste would despise. It is easy to think that Socrates wins the argument only by changing the subject.
However, there is more to the strategy than this suggests. Callicles (491b) wants to say that the successful unjust man will be kalos, and admirable in recognizable ways: he will, for instance, be intelligent and brave. But the direction of Socrates’ argument, which brings it close to the concerns of the Republic, is to suggest that Callicles has no right to suppose that, on the assumptions he and his unjust man are left with, there could be a basis either for admiring virtues such as intelligence and courage, or for thinking that the unjust man could actually sustain them. How does the immoralist explain the values of courage and intelligence? He may do so in terms of political power: but quite early in their discussion (488–489), Socrates shows that there is a conflict between such a political conception and Callicles’ ideal of an individual person who is “better”, since political power is a collective enterprise, in which the individuals are not going to be in his sense “better”, above all in a democracy. 11 The alternative is that the immoralist explains the value of these human qualities simply in terms of the satisfaction of desire—that is to say, as Plato puts it, in terms of pleasure. But that is not convincing, since someone can think of himself as kalos only if he can admire himself, and that implies grounds on which others can admire him, which implies more generally that one person can admire another.12 The criterion which consists merely in the individual’s desires being satisfied provides no basis for admiration at all. The immoralist is left only with hedonism.
Socrates in the Gorgias argues that any basis of admiration implies taxis and kosmos (503d seq.), order and discipline, and these, applied to the soul, constitute justice. This implies, in effect, the Socratic idea of the unity of the virtues, and the immoralist may well say that this is to go too fast. Even if Callicles was not very good at showing it, perhaps the immoralist can have his own disciplines, not including justice.
Now we are precisely at the point that we had reached in the Republic. We are asking what is agathon, what makes a life worth living. The immoralist would like this to include some things that are not merely pleasant, but worthy of admiration: he wants there to be, as we might say, a basis for value. He would hope that these might include courage and intelligence, say, but not justice. Socrates wants to say, first, that if we think solely in terms of desire-satisfaction, there will be no basis for value, nothing to admire at all, and, moreover, life will not be worth living, since it will be a mess. Some discipline is necessary for there to be any stability, and that requires there to be a product of thought, something that can be better or worse, which indeed implies that there are some characters to be admired, others to be despised (the dimension of the kalon). So far the Gorgias, and the same point is of course repeatedly made in the Republic. But Socrates in the Republic will offer further arguments to bind justice more closely into these thoughts, and he addresses them to two different parties. To the immoralists he says: You need some structure and discipline if life is not to be a mess, and (as this itself implies) there is something to be admired, some basis of value. I shall show you that the structure and discipline which you must accept if you are to admire and value anything (say, courage and intelligence) are such that you must also admire and value justice; and “admire and value” means, admire and value for its own sake. To the friends of justice, Glaucon and Adeimantus, he adds: I am not going merely to show the immoralists that they cannot do without justice; I am going to show them that they cannot do without valuing it for its own sake, which is what you wanted in the first place.
There is a political aspect, as I said earlier, to the same argument. The “analogy” between the individual and the city which is introduced at Rep. 368d is officially put forward to help us understand justice in the individual: it is as though the same message were written in larger letters. (In fact, the whole development of the Republic shows that the matter of justice in the city is pursued, not only to help with the original question, but for its own sake.) The basis of the supposed analogy is in fact dubious, and I have argued elsewhere13 that Plato moves between two different principles which pull in different directions: that the account of a given character in a city and in an individual is the same, and that a city has a certain character if all, most, or a leading section of its citizens have that character. Plato’s political conclusions, I suggested, exploit this ambiguity. In particular, he implies both that in the just city all the citizens are just (which is what one might hope), and also that citizens of the lower classes are no more just than the lower sections of the soul are rational, which is why they need to be dominated by the Guardians.
However this may be, it is certainly true that the lower classes in the city, like the lower sections of the soul, cannot look after themselves: they have no inherent principles of order and discipline. The order and discipline that they need come from elsewhere: in the political case, from the Guardians. This means that the Guardians must be ethically self-sufficient, and this means that they must be able to see that justice is worth pursuing for its own sake. If justice were, as Glaucon explains, valuable only as a second-best, there would be no motive for the Guardians to be just, since they are not in anyone else’s power. The constitution of Plato’s city essentially depends on justice being good in itself, or for its own sake.
Plato could not use this conclusion, of course, to demonstrate that justice was good in itself. Those who accept Glaucon’s account will reasonably not trust Plato’s constitution. For them, a just city will reject ethical aristocracy and will consist of imperfect citizens keeping an eye on each other. This is why the ethical and the political parts of Plato’s enterprise help each other. The ethical argument we have already followed suggests that people’s lives will be incoherent if they are the sort of people who (the political analogy suggests) form the lower two classes of the city, and if, in addition, they try to be ethically self-sufficient. Democracy, in particular, is the project of such people trying to be ethically self-sufficient as a collective, and that is a doomed venture which ends in tyranny, just as the immoralist (Plato claims), though he would like to be a free spirit who admires and is admired by some other free spirits, can in the end be nothing but a sordid slave of desire.
We need not accept Plato’s outlook, and not many people do. But one needs to go on a long ethical journey to find what exactly it is that one rejects, and it will be important, for each person, to decide what this will be. Certainly, the claim that justice has to be valued in itself, or for its own sake, is not a mere moralistic assumption of Plato’s, and he has not simply set himself a gratuitously difficult task of demonstrating it. It is deeply rooted in the whole enterprise. One important question we are left with now, reading the Republic in a very different, and differently democratic, time, is not so much whether we agree with Socrates or with Glaucon, but how far they might both be right. What is it to admire and practice justice “for its own sake”? Perhaps the lesson of Glaucon’s argument is just this, that precisely because we need justice as an instrument we need to admire it for its own sake; and that what we need to do is to learn how to do this, while not forgetting why we are doing so.
1 The display of this idea in the Melian Dialogue (Thuc. 5, 84–111) has to be read in parallel with the account of Athens in the Funeral Speech (2, 35–46): neither need undermine the other. Plato, of course, believed that democracy was essentially unprincipled, in all its operations. One might read the startlingly vicious attack on Pericles (the most admired democrat) in the Gorgias (515 d ff.), as implying that the distinction offered by Thucydides cannot be sustained. (Notably, the charge against Pericles is that like other democrats he flattered the crowd, something explicitly denied by Thucydides, 2, 64.8.)
2 Granted the wide range of the term dikaiosynê in the Republic, the issue under discussion can be taken to be the value of the ethical life as a whole. “Justice” is the only appropriate translation of the term, and I shall stay with it, but the broad scope of the issue must be kept in mind.
3 “Consequences” translates more than one expression: ta apobainonta 357b6; hosa gignetai ap’autôn d1, 358b6. There are also, of course, various references to specific consequences of justice, or rather of the reputation for it.
4 . . . chrê zên: for the force of chrê, cf. B. Williams, Shame and Necessity, Berkeley 1993, 184 n 57, and materials cited there. By the time of Plato, the term bears a certain contrast with dei, which introduces rather a notion of (relatively) external necessity. So in the Republic, the idea that the just life is a life one “should” (chrê) live is contrasted with the idea that one “has to”, is “forced to”, live it: cf. 358c, people pursue justice as necessary, not as good.
5 Often called, as I shall call it, “Gyges’ ring”, though the reference is explicitly to an ancestor of Gyges.
6 It is not clear, in particular, whether the genuinely just man “appears” unjust because he has an unconventional notion of justice, so that the world judges unfavourably the character he really has; or, rather, the world factually misunderstands what his character is. The latter makes a neater parallel with the contrasting case, but the former presents a more relevant challenge, and is also of course closer to the case of Socrates. I have discussed the passage (and considered the ideal of ethical autonomy which it expresses) in: Shame and Necessity, 98 seq. with n 46; and see n 47 for the point that the reference to Aeschylus does not help.
7 It is generally supposed that the Gorgias is earlier than Books II to X (at least) of the Republic, but nothing turns on this for the present discussion.
8 For the role of shame in Greek (and, indeed, our own) ethical experience, see: Shame and Necessity, in particular chapter IV and endnote 1.
9 Gorg. 474c seq. Kakon and aischron mostly appear in this discussion in their comparative forms.
10 My very bare summary follows what I take to be the points in the dialogue that are most significant for the present question. Needless to say, other important patterns can be extracted from what is a very rich set of arguments (which also raise some specially acute questions about Plato’s use of fallacy).
11 In connection with the later discussion of Pericles, Socrates is in effect presenting Callicles with a dilemma for the aristocratic or oligarchic immoralist: the Athenian empire, which was run in ways he should admire, was run by a democracy. Cf. n 2, above.
12 It is a Calliclean idea, obvious in his opening speech about nature and convention (482e seq.), that the respectable secretly admire the ruthless, unless they have been intimidated into not doing so. This is very close to the inspiration of the Gyges’ ring story.
13 “The Analogy of City and Soul in Plato’s Republic”, in: Lee, Mourelatos and Rorty (eds.), Exegesis and Argument: Studies in Greek Philosophy presented to Gregory Ulastos, Assen 1973 [= chap. 7 below—Ed.].
EIGHT
Plato’s Construction of Intrinsic Goodness
I
Thrasymachus says in Book I of the Republic that justice is ‘the advantage of the stronger’ (338C). This is not offered as a or definition of justice: if it were, it would lead to the conclusion that since the stronger certainly pursues his own advantage, he must pursue justice, which Thrasymachus of course denies. Closer to what he principally wants to say is his later statement (343C) that justice is an , something that always does somebody else some good. Thrasymachus’ own account operates at the very primitive level of dividing agents (whether they be individual people or cities) into two types, the strong and the weak, and identifying justice simply as a device used by the strong to exploit the weak. This immediately raises the question of what makes one agent stronger than another. In particular, what makes a collective agent, such as a city or a group of bandits, strong? Indeed, what makes it a collective agent at all? The answer, as Socrates points out at 351 seq, must be, to a significant degree, the practice of justice between the individuals who form the collective agent. So Thrasymachus’ primitive model must be wrong.
This implies, further, that we cannot go on saying simply that justice ‘always does someone else some good.’ Thrasymachus himself, when he said this, did not mean that the benefits secured by any just act were uniquely benefits to someone other than the agent. He did not deny that when the weaker party acts in accordance with justice, he secures a benefit for himself; he claimed that when this is so, it is only because of power possessed by someone else who is stronger and who also gains a benefit. Justice is always in someone else’s interest, because when an agent has an interest in doing some just act, it is always (leaving aside errors, which are discussed at 339ff.) because it is in someone else’s interest that this itself should be so.
However, not even this much will be true, once we accept that justice helps to make collective agents strong. In place of Thrasymachus’ view, that justice is a device used by the strong to exploit the weak, we have the idea put forward by Glaucon in Book II, that it is a device of the (individually) weak to make themselves (collectively) strong—to make themselves stronger, in fact, than those who, before this association, were individually strong. On this account, Thrasymachus’ first formulation, that justice is the interest of the stronger, might be replaced with an equally crude slogan to the effect that it is the interest of the weaker. When the association of the (previously) weak is formed, and the collective agent comes into being, justice does each of the participants some good in a way that does not depend on its doing some other, exploiting, party some good.
Expressed in these terms, Thrasymachus’ and Glaucon’s accounts seem to be opposed to one another. It is not simply that they can easily be formulated in terms that are contrary to one another: to us, the opposition may seem to extend to their ethical value. The Thrasymachean account, to the extent that it can be made coherent at all, is fiercely reductive and ‘unmasks’ justice as an exploitative device. Glaucon’s theory, on the other hand, is the ancestor of honourable contractualist accounts which show why justice is the basis of collective endeavours and the division of labour, and why it is of great value to human beings.
Granted these differences, it is significant that every party to the discussion in the Republic treats Glaucon’s position (and its elaboration by Adeimantus) as essentially a somewhat refined version of Thrasymachus’.‘I shall renew Thrasymachus’ argument, ’ Glaucon says (358B–C); and Adeimantus, who, like his brother, does not accept this outlook himself but wants to hear it refuted by Socrates, says that he has put as strongly as he can the view of Thrasymachus and others who agree with him (367B). The reason for this is, at one level, obvious. There is an opinion about justice that Thrasymachus on the one hand, and Glaucon and Adeimantus on the other, certainly share, despite their other differences:that the life of justice1 is in some sense a second best. This is the issue that is picked out at the beginning of Book II, when the distinction is made between things that are valued in themselves, things that are valued for their consequences, and things that are valued for both (357–8).2 What Socrates is encouraged to show, contrary to the common opinion which has been expressed in different ways by Thrasymachus and by Glaucon, is that justice falls into the third class. It is obvious that this is the issue, but there is another question to which the answer is rather less obvious: why should the discussion take this form? Why are the standards for the value of justice raised so high?
The first point to emphasize is how radically individualistic, at this stage of the discussion, the issue is taken to be. Glaucon’s account might be said to show that we have an interest in pursuing justice, and if we assume that ‘we’ is taken collectively, this is straightforwardly true. Indeed, as we have already seen, granted the collective ‘we’, justice does not even come out as a second best—without justice there will be no collective ‘we’. But the collective ‘we’ has a tendency to unravel, and in the discussion with Thrasymachus we are not allowed to assume it. The question whether we have reason to pursue justice is taken, by Socrates as it is by Thrasymachus, to refer to each of us. The question each of us must ask is ‘what reason do I have to be just?’, ‘what does justice do for me?’. This is the force of Socrates’ earlier remark (352D): our discussion is not about a trivial matter, but about how one should live.
The question, then, is about the best life for the individual, and already at 347E Socrates has said that he regards it as an issue ‘bigger’ than Thrasymachus’ first formulations, whether he was right in thinking that the life of the unjust person was better4 than that of the just. A closely related idea is that no-one would choose to be just if he had an alternative (‘no-one is willingly just, ’ 360C). The force of this is supposedly given to us by the two thought-experiments that Glaucon presents, the ring of invisibility (359D–360) and that in which we are invited to think about two men, one of whom has all the social rewards of justice without being really just, while the other has genuine justice and none of its conventional rewards (360E–361D).
There are difficulties with each of the thought-experiments: the second, because it is not clear what exactly we are invited to suppose, 5 and the first, because it is unclear what it could tell us about real life. But they are intended, in any case, to sharpen the question ‘do you value justice for its own sake or for the sake of the rewards and the reputation that conventionally go with it?’ The question gains in force when we take into account Adeimantus’ contribution. The general effect of that contribution is to reinforce Glaucon’s insistence that we should ‘take away reputation’ (367B), and we may wonder why he says that the argument has not been adequately expressed by Glaucon, and that ‘what most needed saying has not been said’ (362D). His point is that as Glaucon has put it, it is the enemies of justice such as Thrasymachus who emphasize the idea that people pursue justice for the sake of the conventional rewards. On the contrary, Adeimantus says, the real problem is that the friends of justice, people who are trying to encourage the young to be just, themselves emphasize those rewards, and so sell justice short; and he cites passages from the poets to this effect (prefiguring some of the objections that will be brought against them later in the dialogue).
II
All this, then, gives some sense to the idea of pursuing, and praising, justice ‘for its own sake’. But now we must ask why Plato thinks it so important that we should value justice in this way. What is the point of insisting that one does not value justice properly unless one values it, in this sense, for its own sake? A modern reader may easily be misled at this point, and take the answer to this question to be more familiar than it is. He or she may take Plato to be thinking of a pure, self-sufficient moral motivation, in terms of which the agent does good or right actions simply because that is what they are, and for no other reason. On this conception, if one reflects on the value of a moral life, one will insist simply on its moral value: this is what it is to be concerned with justice and other moral values for their own sake, and it is contrasted with relating those values to anything else at all, such as one’s own happiness. But this, certainly, is not Plato’s concern. His argument can be formulated only because there is one, univocal, kind of question in practical reason, ‘how should I live?’, ‘what is the best life?’, ‘how shall I do best?’, to which Thrasymachus and his friends give the wrong answer, and Socrates, on behalf of justice, will give the right answer. It is not that the pursuit of justice ‘for its own sake’ has a quite special, moral, value which vindicates itself. The question of its value, rather, is the question of what makes a life worth living, a question to which other ‘non-moral’ goods might in principle, as the others suggest, provide the answer.
Another way of putting the point is that the idea of ‘pursuing justice for its own sake’ occurs in Socrates’ answer to the question, not in the question itself. The question is not ‘What is the value of justice pursued for its own sake, as opposed to the sake of its consequences?’ The question is: ‘What is the value of justice?’, and Socrates’ answer is: ‘It has no value (really), unless it has value when it is pursued for its own sake.’ So the question remains: why does Plato’s Socrates think this? Why does he raise the standards for the vindication of justice so high?
The question has been put in terms of someone’s desiring or valuing or pursuing justice for its own sake. This might equally be expressed in terms of justice being valued or pursued as an end, or as a final good. This, so far, does not give us a sense for justice being a final good, as distinct from some agent’s pursuing it as a final good, but the discussion between Socrates and the Thrasymachean party already suggests a direction in which one might get to that notion: what was to be the Aristotelian way, to the effect that justice is a final good if a rational, reflective, or wise person would pursue it as a final good. We shall need to keep this idea in mind.
However, my title uses a different phrase, ‘intrinsic goodness’, and we must not assume that this is the same idea. Christine Korsgaard has pointed out6 that the standard contrast to ‘final’ is ‘instrumental’, while the contrast to ‘intrinsic’ is ‘extrinsic’, and you need a theory to show that these two distinctions come to the same thing. Korsgaard makes several important points, but I do not want simply to accept her account as the basis of my discussion. She writes:
To say that something is intrinsically good is not by definition to say that it is valued for its own sake: it is to say that it has its goodness in itself. It refers to the location or source of the value rather than the way we value the thing.
Extrinsic goodness, on the other hand, is value that something gets from some other source.
One consideration that Korsgaard uses in separating the intrinsic/ extrinsic distinction from the final/instrumental distinction does not seem to me to have the effect that her account requires. There are, as she says, various ways in which the goodness of one thing can be dependent on the goodness of another without the first being a means to the second. But many of these possibilities apply to practical reason itself. As David Wiggins and others have pointed out in discussing Aristotle, one may value going to the concert as a way of, not as a causal condition of, having a good evening. This kind of example is among those that Korsgaard uses to distinguish extrinsic from instrumental value. But these examples need not lead us to a notion which, in contrast to the final/instrumental distinction, refers to ‘the source of the value rather than the way we value the thing’. It need lead us only to the conclusion that even within the scope of practical reason, or again, ‘the way we value’ something, the contrast to ‘final’ should be something broader than ‘instrumental’; there are various ways of pursuing something ‘derivatively’, as we might say, as opposed to pursuing it as an end or final good, and one species of this is pursuing it as a means or instrument.
There is a second question about Korsgaard’s account of these distinctions which is very relevant to the present discussion. As Korsgaard formulates her central point:
One [distinction is that] between things valued for their own sakes and things valued for the sake of something else—between ends and means, or final and instrumental goods. The other is the distinction between things which have their value in themselves and things which derive their value from some other source: intrinsically good things versus extrinsically good things.
But we do not need Aristotle to remind us that a rational or wise person can pursue or value a certain thing both for its own sake and for the sake of something else. We have already seen that what Socrates wants to show, and will claim in the end to have shown, is that justice should be valued both for itself and for its consequences—that it is both a final and an instrumental good. Let us take ‘a good’ to be some type or general object of pursuit or valuation, such as justice, or honour, or pleasure.(This is the sense in which two rival politicians each of whom is pursuing honour are both pursuing the same good.) If one and the same good can be both final and instrumental, then that distinction is not one between different classes of goods; it is a distinction between kinds of goodness or ways in which things may be found good, and not, as Korsgaard puts it, a distinction between different things. But the intrinsic/extrinsic distinction, as she explains it, must be a distinction between things: if something ‘has its value in itself’—whatever exactly that means—it presumably cannot also ‘derive its value from some other source’. This shows that we are not merely taking apart two distinctions that operate in the same field.
I do not propose to pursue the idea of intrinsic goodness, as distinct from final goodness or goodness as an end, directly. My aim is to work round, in Plato’s thought, to a certain idea of intrinsic goodness and to see what function it performs there. At the end of the paper I shall suggest that we need, for our purposes, an idea of intrinsic goodness which is rather different from the one that we shall have ascribed to Plato; rather paradoxically, it is Plato’s own argument that will have helped to make this clear.
For the immediate discussion of Plato, at any rate, there are three ideas which I should like us to keep in mind from Korsgaard’s formulations and the discussion of them. The first is Korsgaard’s own point that we cannot assume that a notion of intrinsic goodness must be the same as that of final goodness or goodness as an end. The second idea, which we may take from Korsgaard’s language of ‘sources’, is that the notions of intrinsic and extrinsic goodness have something to do with the ways in which the goodness of various things is explained; and, closely connected with this, that the notion of something intrinsically good is that of a thing whose goodness is in some sense self-explanatory. Third, there is an obscurity about what it is that these distinctions serve to distinguish: in particular, whether they distinguish good things, or ways in which good things are conceived or valued.
III
Now I should like to start again, from a different point in Plato’s work—Diotima’s speech in the Symposium.
The symposiasts have been talking about what is, what it is to be a lover. We know that the lover has desires. We know that the lover and his desires have some relation to beauty or beautiful things; in particular, beautiful young men. Now we learn more precisely what these desires are, and what their relation is to the beautiful. It is certainly not—as opposed to what some earlier speeches said—that the desire itself is beautiful. Nor is the desire a desire for the beautiful, at least in any sense that is at all transparent: (206E2–5) ‘love is not love of the beautiful, as you think.—What is it, then?—Of reproduction and birth in the beautiful.’ This desire itself turns out to be an expression, or form, of a desire to be immortal.
Now this provides a schema, to put it in rather formal terms, which can be filled out differently for different type of . A man’s for a woman defines birth, , literally; , ‘in association with’, is sexual; and the immortality in question is genetic. But a man may bring forth or generate not babies but ideas or poems, and live for ever (or at least for longer) through those. The beauty in question may now be that of a particular youth, or something more general—as we might say, youthful beauty; again, that may be beauty of soul rather than of body. There is nothing in all this to imply that the various refinements, as perhaps we may call them, necessarily keep step with one another. Socrates has been disposed to generate ideas and good thoughts but in association with youths who had beautiful bodies; though he may have got at least some of the way towards being ‘a lover of all beautiful bodies’ (210B), rather than being obsessed with one person. Conversely, Alcibiades, we learn later, is drawn to Socrates’ beautiful soul (215–217), but he has little idea of what an appropriate would be.
Then Diotima gives her account of the end of the progress, to the ‘final and highest mysteries of love’ (210A), which she doubts that Socrates can achieve. Here, in a famous passage, the lover is said to turn to the great sea of beauty, and will come to see something ‘wonderfully beautiful in its nature’, which
always is and neither comes to be nor passes away, neither waxes nor wanes; it is not beautiful in one way and ugly in another, nor beautiful at one time and not at another, nor beautiful in relation to one thing and ugly in relation to another, nor beautiful in one place and ugly in another, as it would be if it were beautiful to some people and ugly to others;
and it is not embodied in any face or body, or idea, or knowledge, or, indeed, in anything. This culminating, ultimately fulfilling, encounter still fits the original schema. This would indeed be a worthwhile life for a man (212A); he would bring forth, not images of virtue, but true virtue, and his relation to , which is now the item that has just been described, would be that of seeing it and being with it, words reminiscent of the language originally applied to sexual relations with a beautiful person.
There are several things which, it is important to see, this account does not imply. It has been thought to imply that no-one ever really loves a particular person, but only the beauty in that person, a beauty of which that person is at best a poor exemplar. On the contrary, the account gives a sense to loving a particular person, in the form of a range of different contents laid down by the schema, and it denies that love is for beauty itself. Moreover, there is no suggestion that the particulars, these bodies or souls, were only seemingly or illusorily beautiful. They are indeed not unconditionally, or unqualifiedly, or perhaps we can say (as opposed to ‘relatively’) absolutely, beautiful, which is what the item of the final vision is. Indeed, retrospectively from the point of view of the vision, human bodies and colours and other such things are said to be merely ‘mortal nonsense’, but that is a comparative judgement of value, and it does not imply that it was simply a mistake to have thought that those things were beautiful, or even that one was mistaken to have pursued them. We may say that it is like a growth in aesthetic taste, from kitschy music, say, to more interesting music. It does not altogether deny the point or the object of the earlier taste, and indeed the earlier taste is a condition of the process, which is a progress rather than the mere detection of error or the elimination of a misunderstanding.
Diotima says that the earlier pursuits were ‘for the sake of’ () the final secrets, 210A, and she also says of one who comes to the vision that he is coming to the * of the erotic, which may imply a similar idea, though it need not. But, emphatically and several times, she says that this is so only for one who is going about the erotic in the right way.9 This does not mean that unless the ultimate state is reached, the earlier states are pointless. It means that from the later perspective we can see a point to them which they do not reveal at all to some people, and reveal only imperfectly even to those who are going about them in the right way. For those who do go about them in the right way, that imperfection is expressed in an obscure unsatisfactoriness or incompleteness in those relationships, which can be traced to their failure to express adequately the desire to have the good for ever.
Diotima at some points makes it seem that once one has got going in the right way the ascent or refinement is almost inevitable: (210B) ‘if one is to pursue beauty of form, it would be great foolishness not to recognize that the beauty in all bodies is one and the same.’ Yet she also describes the ascent as involving tasks (E6). All this refers to the higher levels of the progress, above the point which she is doubtful that Socrates himself will be able to pass. Now Socrates is not liable to great foolishness, and what is to come later, the speech of Alcibiades, will show that he is not incapable of ethical tasks which may be involved. I take it that we are being told that Socrates was not in a position really to ‘pursue beauty of form’, and that the discovery of the sea of beauty, the final vision, involves intellectual tasks that were formulated by Plato himself.
The object of the final vision is absolutely or unconditionally beautiful. If we associate the idea of the intrinsic with a notion of explanation, we may also say that this object is intrinsically beautiful; although Plato does not make much of it in the Symposium, he certainly thought that this object would explain, in some sense, why anything, including itself, was beautiful. The object is also, I suppose, a good thing: to reach it was the of a progress inspired by the desire to have the good for ever. However, just in virtue of the account (or, rather, the apology for an account) which we have suggested for ‘intrinsic’, we must not suppose that because this object is intrinsically beautiful, and it is good, it is intrinsically good. If it were intrinsically good, its goodness would not be explained by anything else. But we know, not from the Symposium but from the Republic, that its goodness is explained by something else, the Form of the Good, which explains the goodness of everything including itself (as the sun enables everything including itself to be seen, 508B). On the provisional account of intrinsic goodness, the Form of the Good is, for Plato, the only intrinsically good thing.
There are significant differences of tone between the Symposium and the Republic. The Symposium more emphasizes the pathos of the finite, the attractiveness of the contingently and transitorily beautiful which nevertheless carries with it a yearning for something the beauty of which will not be transitory, something to which some people may be able to ascend. The ascent of course has parallels in the Republic, but many of that dialogue’s most powerful images are those of descent, which convey the regret of the return to the cave, of leaving the unconditioned for the conditioned. Relatedly, the Republic makes more of the idea that the contrast between the conditioned and the unconditioned is a contrast between appearance and reality, and its images of the contingent, particularly in relation to the Cave and in the discussions of art, are of illusion, deceit and dreams (476C); even though, when Socrates in Book V (479A) explains why the ‘lovers of sights’ are in a state of belief , the ‘appearances’ he cites are in fact matters of comparison or relativity.
Yet the end of the educational story that the Republic tells, the vision it offers, is strikingly similar to that of the Symposium. The Guardians are drawn to the intellectual world by love: they love study which tells them about being (485B), and the Form of the Good is the ‘greatest study’ (505A2). ‘And so we shall say that they will admire and love the things of which there is knowledge’ (479 fin), and notably at 490B we are told that
the genuine lover of learning . . . would go on and would not be discouraged and would not cease from* until he seized with the appropriate part of his soul each thing that by its nature is, and drawing near to what really is and being united with it , he would bring forth reason and truth, he would know and would live in truth, and would be nourished and so would cease from his painful labour. . . .
The intrinsically beautiful in the Symposium was not something that it would make sense to want: what one wanted was to generate the right kind of offspring (virtue, in fact) in its presence, which means in its cognitive presence. In exactly the same way, the Form of the Good, that which is, and alone is, intrinsically good in an explanatory sense, is not anything that one wants: what one wants is to generate reason and truth in its presence—that is to say, in its cognitive presence and by its intellectual light.
IV
Aristotle famously said (EN 1096b33–5) that if there were a separate and absolute Good, ‘it is obvious that it could not be achieved or possessed by man; but it is to something of that sort that our inquiry is directed.’ If Aristotle means by this (he may not) that Plato unfortunately overlooked this feature of the Form of the Good, that it is not achievable in action, he has missed the point: it would be a category mistake to suppose that it could be any such thing. If he means (equally, he may not) that Plato introduced the Form of the Good, a supposedly self-explanatory intrinsically good thing, in place of a final good, which is what Aristotle himself was looking for, then he is also mistaken. Plato has more than one final good, and the most significant is the life of the intellect—living, as he put it, in the presence of Forms—and this involves living in the light of the Form of the Good. So there is a final good, one among others, which is related to the intrinsic self-explanatory good, but it is not the same as that good, and it would not make sense to suppose that it was.
For reasons that Aristotle gave, and which Plato began to explore in his later work, there are grave problems in even understanding the notion of something that is absolutely good or beautiful in the sense of the Symposium and the Republic. The problems do not come simply from the idea that the goodness or beauty of such a thing must be self-explanatory. A major problem is that the thing is meant to explain the goodness or beauty of everything else which is good or beautiful; hence that it cannot be any specific sort of good or beautiful thing; hence that there is nothing else about it which explains its goodness or beauty; and hence, seemingly, that it is good or beautiful and nothing else at all. This is surely unintelligible.
Some of the notorious problems, then, come from the idea that there is just one intrinsically good item which is both self-explanatory and other-explanatory. Yet some of the recalcitrance of the Form of the Good, the difficulty in saying anything about it, would surely arise also with a larger class of self-explanatory intrinsic goods, forming a class of objects whose goodness was to be explained in advance of any human valuation. Such items (unlike the Form of the Good) will have other properties, and the sense in which their goodness will be self-explanatory is, presumably, that it will be explained by those properties. But then what is the nature of the a priori guarantee (as it will have to be) that such an explanation cannot refer to something else: for instance, that it might not be improved by referring to something else? Might it not be improved, for instance, by relating these properties to things that we value? Moreover, what is the a priori guarantee that some of those same properties could not causally depend on some other intrinsically good thing, as they cannot, if intrinsic goods and extrinsic goods are to form two disjunct classes? I shall not try to explore these questions here, but I find it hard to believe that the problems posed by Plato’s Form of the Good are entirely due to its special role as a unique and explanatorily very ambitious intrinsic good.
The main point I want to emphasize, however, is not how hard it is for Plato to specify the Form of the Good, but how much he manages to say without specifying it. The criticism of Plato in Aristotelian style, to the effect that his account of the good is too intellectualist and inadequate to the claims of practical reason, is likely to distract us from a rather obvious feature of the Republic, that a lot of what it actually tells us about the Form of the Good consists of considerations that relate it to practical reason. It tells us almost nothing about the intellectual content of encountering the Form of the Good; it leaves us uncertain how much Socrates himself knows about it, and certain that he cannot at this point explain whatever he does know about it (506E, 517B, 532–3). Yet Socrates is supposed, by the end of the dialogue, to have met fully the challenge set in Book II; so it must be possible to understand why justice is a final good without understanding adequately, or barely at all, what the one and only intrinsic good is, or what is involved in its theoretical contemplation. We can understand Socrates’ answer because we can gather from his account at least the following: that the wise or rational person needs to regard justice as a final good, and that he can make sense of it as a final good. We can take away some more as well, about the role of the Form of the Good in this, and I shall come back to that, but the central point is that we can take away these two conclusions.
The first conclusion, that the rational person needs to regard justice as a final good, has both an individual and a political form. In its individual form it is implicit in the description of the divisions of the soul in Book IV, and in the associated account of the various virtues. A less schematic expression of it occurs in the studies of degeneration in Books VIII and IX, but it may be less easy to see, partly because those studies, for obvious reasons, tend to mix psychological and political considerations, and partly because the story of degeneration is shaped by comparisons with a completed state of justice which by this stage is taken for granted, and so the story may not help us to see what exactly the individual’s need for justice is. To get a slightly different view of Plato’s account of this, it may be helpful to look outside the Republic again, to a dialogue which has many of the same preoccupations, the Gorgias.
V
This dialogue presents conversations that Socrates has with three speakers, i.e., Gorgias, Polus, and Callicles, who take in succession increasingly radical positions. The discussions are structured by the use that is made of three distinct value oppositions. One is the contrast between , the just and the unjust: this relates, as in the Republic, to values that concern fair dealing with others, respect for their persons and their property, and generally a prohibition on exploiting them. The terms of the second distinction, , are understood here not in their directly aesthetic sense as in the Symposium, but in their connection with action and character, where they relate to honour and shame. I take it, as I have argued elsewhere, that this is not merely a matter of one’s reputation; the distinction is one between things that agents can be proud of, and think well of themselves for having done or been, as opposed to things for which they despise themselves, feel ashamed or embarrassed or contemptible.
The last contrast, between , good and bad, is often, in the Gorgias as elsewhere, interpreted in terms of self-interest: one seeks the in seeking what is best for oneself. The basic idea, however, is something more general and abstract, the idea of what an agent has good reason to pursue or not. These are the terms which are, throughout these conversations, unquestionably tied to the conclusions of practical reason, and it makes no sense in this context to say that an agent knows that something is (on balance) , and that he has decided that this is what (on balance) he has reason to pursue.
Gorgias, the first speaker, accepts the conventional idea that all these values go together, so that what is is also : we have reason to pursue the just and should think well of ourselves and others for doing so. It is in these terms that he defends his practice of rhetoric. Polus enters the discussion to offer a more radical position, which separates : we should stop thinking that the is what we have reason to do. However, he treats the dimension of and in a less radical way, and is manoeuvred by Socrates into claiming both that to behave unjustly is , and that what is is —that is to say, that we have reason to avoid it.14 This is inconsistent with his attempt to hold that injustice is not .
Polus’ mistake is to sustain at once a conventional link between and (just behaviour is admired, injustice is something to be ashamed of), and a natural link between (we have reason to do what will make us admired, no reason to do what will make us ashamed of ourselves). The last speaker, Callicles, sees Polus’ mistake, and, takes the further step of denying the conventional link between . In doing this, he wants to keep the link between : the rational person will want to be admired and envied, to think well of himself, and not to be an object of contempt, but he will bring this about, Callicles urges, through power and the exploitation of others, having no concern for considerations of justice.
Callicles is a more powerfully eloquent, and in some ways more sophisticated, version of Thrasymachus. He is supposedly refuted, but it is easy to feel that Plato has deliberately dealt him a hand of losing cards. Although there are several complexities in the argument, Callicles effectively ends up (from about Gorg. 491 onwards) defending a crudely gluttonous form of hedonistic activity, which not many are likely to envy. But this was not supposed to be the idea. The successfully unjust man was supposed to be a rather grand, powerful, stylish figure (the aesthetic echoes of are relevant here) whom others, if they were honest, could admire and envy; but he has ended up, in Socrates’ refutation, as a low addict or at best a heartlessly boring bon viveur, whom anyone with any taste would despise. It is easy to think that Socrates wins the argument only by changing the subject.
However, there is more to the strategy than this suggests. Callicles (491B) wants to say that the successful unjust man will be , and admirable in recognizable ways: he will, for instance, be intelligent and brave. But the direction of Socrates’ argument, which brings it close to the concerns of the Republic, is to suggest that Callicles has no right to suppose that, on the assumptions he and his unjust man are left with, there could be a basis either for admiring virtues such as intelligence and courage, or for thinking that the unjust man could actually sustain them. How does Callicles explain the values of courage and intelligence? He may do so in terms of political power: but quite early in their discussion (488–489), Socrates shows that there is a conflict between such a political conception and Callicles’ ideal of an individual person who is ‘better’, since political power is a collective enterprise, in which the individuals are not going to be in his sense ‘better’, above all in a democracy.16 The alternative is that he explains the value of these human qualities simply in terms of the satisfaction of desire—that is to say, as Plato puts it, in terms of pleasure. But that is not convincing, since someone can think of himself as only if he can admire himself, and that implies grounds on which others can admire him, which implies more generally that one person can admire another.17 A criterion that consists merely in the individual’s desires being satisfied provides no basis for admiration at all. All that is left is hedonism.
Socrates in the Gorgias argues that any basis of admiration implies and (503D seq), order and discipline, and that these, applied to the soul, constitute justice. The argument for this, which in the Gorgias could politely be called schematic, is strengthened in the Republic, with its account of the parts of the soul and their functions. At the same time, the Republic’s account is more complex, since it allows types of individual between the perfectly just person and the democratic or, worse, tyrannical person to whom Callicles’ ideal, according to the Gorgias, must inevitably be reduced. But of course the Republic claims to show that the intermediate types are not as they would wish to be if they understood their natures better; and even they must, to some extent, regard justice as a final good.
Moreover, we need there to be people who regard justice as a final good if there is to be any stability for anyone. This is the political aspect of the argument. The ‘analogy’ between the individual and the city which is introduced at Rep. 368D is officially put forward to help us understand justice in the individual: it is as though the same message were written in larger letters. In fact, the way in which the Republic proceeds means that justice in the city and in the individual cannot be separated from one another, and the answers that the dialogue eventually gives to Thrasymachus and to the questions of Glaucon and Adeimantus are essentially political.
Whatever exactly the state of the lower classes in the city is meant to be, 18 it is certainly true that they are like the lower sections of the soul in this respect, that they cannot look after themselves: they have no inherent principles of order and discipline. The order and discipline that they need come from elsewhere, from the Guardians. This means that the Guardians must be ethically self-sufficient, and this means that they must be able to see that justice is worth pursuing for its own sake. If justice were, as Glaucon argued, valuable only as a second-best, there would be no motive for the Guardians to be just, since they are not in anyone else’s power. The constitution of Plato’s city essentially depends on its rulers seeing justice as good in itself, or for its own sake, and if it is to be more than a virtuous tyranny, the lower classes will have to have some kind of belief to the same effect.
Plato could not use this conclusion, of course, to demonstrate that justice was good in itself. Those who accept Glaucon’s account will reasonably not trust Plato’s constitution. For them, a just city will reject ethical aristocracy and will consist of imperfect citizens keeping an eye on each other. This is why the ethical and the political parts of Plato’s enterprise help each other. The ethical argument we have already followed suggests that people’s lives will be incoherent if they are the sort of people who (the political analogy suggests) form the lower two classes of the city, and if, in addition, they try to be ethically self-sufficient. Democracy, in particular, is the project of such people trying to be ethically self-sufficient as a collective, and that is a doomed venture which ends in tyranny, just as Callicles, though he would like to be a free spirit who admires and is admired by some other free spirits, can in the end be nothing but a sordid slave of desire.
The city needs just people as rulers, but, equally, just people need the city. This is to some degree concealed by the downward movement of the Republic, which emphasizes the sacrifice of the Guardians in becoming rulers. But the question of that sacrifice can come up only in a context in which the able young have received an education which enables them to be Guardians, that is to say, the education offered in a just city. Guardians will not emerge, and young people will not become fully just, unless the institutions replicate themselves (which is what, the tale of decline tells us, will eventually fail to happen); and it is precisely the strongest spirits that will be corrupted without those institutions (492). So not only does the city need people who will see justice as a final end; such people, and young people who would like to become such people but do not yet fully understand what is involved, need the just city, or some approximation to it which can also bring it about that there will be such people.
So we can reply to the challenge of Book II. The rational person needs to regard justice as a final good. Moreover, he, and we, can make sense of regarding it as a final good, because that is exactly what the various arguments of the Republic have enabled us to do. These were the two conclusions that I said we would be able to take away from Socrates’ argument. If we accept them, then, I suggest, we have been shown that justice is a final good.
VI
The Form of the Good, the item that we identified as being, on Plato’s account, the one and only intrinsic good, has played a role in this account, but it is significant what a very small role it is. We are told that if we were to grasp it and work down again from it, we would understand the point of all the virtues, as well as of everything else. But as I have already said, the really significant thing is that Socrates has been able to meet the challenge of Book II, and get us to understand his answer, without any of us getting a glimpse of the Form of the Good. There is indeed an element which is essential to the answer even as we, or Glaucon and Adeimantus, understand it, an element in which the Form of the Good is mentioned. This is the motivation of the Guardians, which makes them reluctant, and hence uniquely reliable, rulers: they are driven by the love of truth, which, Plato tells us, expels other wants (485), with the result that they want no rewards, and so will not squabble or conspire as other rulers do (520 seq). The search for truth, Plato seems to think, is the only genuinely selfless motive; at the same time, it is connected with the truth-seeker’s own self, since it is only as a mind seeking truth that one can fully satisfy the desire for immortality. The Form of the Good is the ultimate object of this search for truth. But once again, it is significant how little difference it would make to the argument if it were not. For the Guardians to have what, on Plato’s account of things, is this essential motive, they need to have in mind a certain final good, the aim of understanding; perhaps, given his ideas of immortality, this must be, more specifically, the aim of understanding eternal reality. It makes no difference to this whether or not this reality has as its highest element the one and only intrinsic good.
It is just because the Form of the Good, which for Plato is the uniquely intrinsic good, is so retiring and inexplicable, that Plato’s account of justice as a good, and, more generally, of what should concern one who is living the best possible life, has so little to do with it. He can answer the basic challenge of the Republic, to show that justice is a final good, and answer it in a way which he can reasonably suppose we shall understand, without his doing much more than to salute the intrinsic good. This is paradoxical, and the paradox suggests some lessons for the way in which we should think about these notions. They are no more than suggestions, but I think that both the failures and the successes of Plato’s enterprise should encourage us to take them seriously.
First, we should abandon the idea that the distinction between intrinsic and extrinsic goodness determines two classes of things. I have already suggested that this idea contributed to the opaque and unhelpful character of absolute beauty and the Form of the Good. If we accept that one and the same thing can be both intrinsically and extrinsically good, then we can, to this extent, bring the intrinsic/extrinsic distinction into line with the final/instrumental distinction.
The next suggestion is that we should take a further step in the same direction, and treat final goods as a species of intrinsic goods. I argued earlier, in criticism of Christine Korsgaard, that the contrasting term to ‘final’ need not be merely ‘instrumental’, but something more general: I proposed the label ‘derivative’. This, in itself, was intended to be a fairly uncontentious proposal. It is more contentious to suggest, as I am now suggesting, that the final/instrumental distinction altogether should be understood as an application of a more fundamental distinction between intrinsic and—using the term now more broadly than before—derivative goodness. The reason why this proposal is more contentious relates to a point about final goodness which we have accepted throughout the discussion: that the basic notion in this connection is that of someone’s wanting or pursuing something as an end or final good, and that the notion of something’s being a final good is to be explained in terms of this, for instance as what a wise or rational person would pursue as an end.
On the present proposal, intrinsic goodness will be treated in a similar way. The notion of something’s being an intrinsic good will be explained in terms of a more basic notion of someone’s valuing something as an intrinsic good.19 It is important that this does not imply that all valuing is reducible to practical attitudes: ‘valuing’ does not entail ‘wanting’ or ‘pursuing’ or ‘trying to bring about’ (or a disjunction of them). This is particularly significant for us who, unlike Plato, regard a range of things in the world as having intrinsic goodness, although they are not ends or final goods: works of art, for instance, or natural beauty. Valuing such things cannot be reduced to practical attitudes. It can of course, in various connexions, be expressed in practical attitudes, and it would be an empty thing if it could not be expressed in such attitudes, even if there are some circumstances in which it can be expressed in no more than wishing. What exactly valuing involves in various circumstances, including what practical attitudes it may involve, is a significant question, and we should expect the answers to it to be fairly open-ended. This is indeed part of the point of the very abstract notion of ‘valuing’.
There should be answers to this question, of what is involved in valuing a certain thing as an intrinsic good. There should be an answer, too, to the further significant question, of why we should value it in this way. This leads to the place of explanation among these notions. It is common to all accounts, presumably, that the extrinsic or derivative is explained in terms of the intrinsic. The interesting questions concern the explanation of the intrinsic. Up to now we have assumed, as Plato assumed when he was concerned with the Form of the Good, that intrinsic goodness should be self-explanatory. This idea turned out to be unfruitful. However, when we considered Plato’s account of the final good of justice, we found that (relative to his own assumptions) he was able to explain it in terms of our needing to treat justice as a final good, and our being able to make sense of our doing so.
My last suggestion is that we should extend this schema to intrinsic goodness in general. We give up the unrewarding idea of intrinsic goodness being self-explanatory. We say that something is intrinsically good if we need to value it as intrinsically good, and we can make sense of our doing so.20 The formula ‘we can make sense of our doing so’ is intended to secure a place in this discussion for something that is almost always a good idea in philosophy, explanation without reduction.
We may take the case of trust, or, more generally, honest relations between people.21 This is widely regarded as a good thing, and there is quite a lot to be said about why it is a good thing. The value of trust and trustworthiness is not self-explanatory, and to claim that it was would be to leave it unexplained, an object of blank intuition. Yet the goodness of these things is not merely derivative, either. We do regard it as intrinsic. Moreover, we have to regard these things as intrinsically good if they are even to be derivatively good, since many of their good effects, and indeed their existence, depend on their being valued as intrinsic goods. So what is needed for us to be able to make sense of them as intrinsic goods? We have to be able to think reflectively about trust and trustworthiness as fitting into a structure of human qualities and social relations, in a way that relates them to other things that we value, and which does not reduce them to a device for maximizing utility or for getting out of the Prisoners’ Dilemma. If they appeared to reflective understanding as simply such a device, the idea that they were intrinsically good would unravel, and we could not make sense of them as intrinsic goods. If we can make sense of these things as intrinsic goods, we are not pretending that they are intrinsic goods. That would be something else: it would be to pretend that we needed them, or to pretend that we could make sense of them as intrinsic goods, and neither of these things need be so. If we can make sense of trustworthiness in such terms, then we shall have constructed an intrinsic good.
Plato’s Form of the Good is a peculiar and very extreme example of what an intrinsic good has to be if it is regarded as a kind of thing that presents itself as self-explanatorily good, prior to any considerations of how we might value it. We have seen how little it contributes to Plato’s enterprise. On the other hand, we have seen how much Plato achieves, in his own terms, by asking the questions ‘do we need to value justice as a final good?’ and ‘can we make sense of our doing so?’ If we use ‘intrinsic’ in the new and broader way, Plato will be asking these questions about justice as intrinsically good, and in answering them, he will have constructed an intrinsic good.
Some passages in this paper are reprinted or adapted, by permission of the publishers which we gratefully acknowledge, from B. Williams, ‘Plato against the Immoralist’, in O. Höffe, ed., Platons Politeia, Berlin: Akademie Verlag, 1997, 55–67, and B. Williams, Plato: The Invention of Philosophy, London: Phoenix, 1998 [respectively chap. 6 above and chap. 10 below—Ed.].
1 Granted the wide range of the term in the Republic, the issue under discussion can be taken to be the general value of ethical constraints on one’s relations to other people. ‘Justice’ is the only appropriate translation of the term, and I shall stay with it, but the broad scope of the issue must be kept in mind.
2 ‘Consequences’ translates more than one expression: 357B6; D1, 358B6. There are also, of course, various references to specific consequences of justice, or rather of the reputation for it.
3 Í Û: for the force of , cf. B. Williams, Shame and Necessity, Berkeley: California University Press, 1993, 184 n.57, and materials cited there. By the time of Plato, the term bears a certain contrast with, which introduces rather a notion of (relatively) external necessity. So in the Republic, the idea that the just life is a life one ‘should’ live is contrasted with the idea that one ‘has to’, is ‘forced to’, live it: cf. 358C, people pursue justice as necessary, not as good.
4 358C.
5 It is not clear, in particular, whether the genuinely just man ‘appears’ unjust because he has an unconventional notion of justice, so that the world judges unfavourably the character he really has; or because the world factually misunderstands what his character is. I have discussed the passage in Shame and Necessity, 98f. with n.46; and see n.47 for the point that the reference to Aeschylus does not help.
6 ‘Two Distinctions in Goodness’, Phil. Rev. 92 (1983); reprinted in Creating the Kingdom of Ends, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1996. The quotation, and the one that follows, occur in the reprint at p. 250.
7 The dialogue may suggest that this itself is an expression of the desire that the good should be with one for ever, 206A. I shall not take this up here.
8 This helps to answer the question which dogs Plato’s account of Socrates, why being loved by Socrates did not transform Alcibiades: it is loving Socrates that should have done that, and he did not know how to do it.
* Goal—Ed.
9 210A2; A4; E3; 211B5.
10 How far, and in what ways, such a feeling may come, in an uninterpreted form, even to those who are not going about the erotic in the right way, is a question to which the earlier speeches suggest answers.
11 A6 ; means ‘. . . will not appear as ugly’, not ‘ . . . will not appear to be ugly.’
* Desire, love—Ed.
12 For , cf. Symp. 212A1, ;.
13 For the role of shame in Greek (and, indeed, our own) ethical experience, see Shame and Necessity, above n.3, in particular chapter IV and Endnote 1.
14 Gorg. 474C seq. mostly appear in this discussion in their comparative forms.
15 My very bare summary follows what I take to be the points in the dialogue that are most significant for the present question. Needless to say, other important patterns can be extracted from what is a very rich set of arguments.
16 In connection with the later discussion of Pericles, Socrates is in effect presenting Callicles with a dilemma for the aristocratic or oligarchic amoralist: the Athenian empire, which was run in ways he should admire, was run by a democracy.
17 It is a Calliclean idea, obvious in his opening speech about nature and convention (482E seq), that the respectable secretly admire the ruthless, unless they have been intimidated into not doing so. This is very close to the inspiration of the Gyges’ ring story in the Republic.
18 I have discussed a difficulty about this, implicit in the supposed analogy, in ‘The Analogy of City and Soul in Plato’s Republic’, in E. N. Lee, A.P.D. Mourelatos and A. O. Rorty eds., Exegesis and Argument: Studies in Greek Philosophy presented to Gregory Vlastos, Assen: van Gorcum, 1973, 196–206 [= chap. 7 above—Ed.].
19 This means, of course, that we cannot explain ‘we value X as an intrinsic good’ as ‘we value X because we believe that it is an intrinsic good’.
20 I do not think that ‘need to’ is too strong, granted that an account is being given of ‘X is an intrinsic good’. The account leaves room for people to treat something as an intrinsic good (for instance, as an end) without their having to claim that it is an intrinsic good überhaupt.
21 I discuss in detail this example of constructing an intrinsic good in Truth and Truthfulness, Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2002.
TEN
Plato: The Invention of Philosophy
Plato invented the subject of philosophy as we know it. He lived from 427 to 347 BC, 1 and he is the first philosopher whose works have come down to us complete. He is also the first to have written on the full range of philosophical questions: knowledge, perception, politics, ethics, art; language and its relations to the world; death, immortality and the nature of the mind; necessity, change and the underlying order of things. A. N. Whitehead said that the European philosophical tradition consisted of ‘a series of footnotes to Plato’2, and his remark makes a point. Of course, the content of the questions has changed in all sorts of ways, with the development of the sciences and radical transformations in society and culture. It is important, too, that we, unlike Plato, have a strong sense of the importance of history in understanding human life, but this sense has come about quite recently, and is absent not only from Plato but from most other philosophers before the nineteenth century, who tended, like him and under his influence, to think of the most important truths as timeless.
Western philosophy not only started with Plato, but has spent most of its life in his company. There was a period in the Middle Ages when almost all his works were unknown, but before that, and after the rediscovery of his texts (Petrarch in the fourteenth century had a manuscript of Plato), he has been read and has been a point of reference. Some thinkers, in various different styles, have thought of themselves as ‘Platonists’; most others have not, and many reject every one of his distinctive positions, but they are all indirectly under his influence. We are all under the influence of thinkers we do not read, but in Plato’s case, people also turn back continually to his work itself. He is in any case a great writer, who can command extraordinary ingenuity, charm, and power, but beyond that, his genius as a philosophical writer is expressed in a special way. Many philosophers write treatises, analysing the problem, arguing with other positions, and setting out their own solutions. Plato did not: he wrote dialogues. With the exception of some Letters, which are doubtfully genuine, 4 all Plato’s works are in this form. Because they are dialogues, there is always something more and different to be drawn from them, not just in the way that this is true of all great works of philosophy, but because Plato specially intends it to be so. The dialogue form is not, for the most part, just an artful way of his telling one something. It is an entry and an invitation to thought.
Plato never appears in the dialogues himself.5 In most of them, a major part is taken by the striking figure of Socrates, Plato’s teacher. They are by far our most important source for what Socrates was like.6 Socrates is the inspiration of the dialogues in more than one way. He himself wrote nothing, and indeed claimed to know nothing, devoting himself, it seems, to engaging people in conversations in which he questioned their most basic beliefs and showed that they had no basis for them. This method is described in several of Plato’s dialogues, and many of them display it in action. But Socrates’ legacy was not just a matter of method. His life, and more particularly his death, left Plato with some of his deepest concerns. Socrates was tried by the Athenian courts in 399 BC and executed, on charges, among other things, of ‘corrupting the youth’, and this disaster starkly raised a range of questions: what the evil was in a political order that could do this; how it was that Socrates’ presence had not made his fellow citizens (including some of his associates) better people; and how much it mattered—whether in the end it mattered at all—that Socrates’ life was lost, granted that his character was uncorrupted. All these were to be central themes of Plato’s philosophy, a philosophy expressed through the dialogue form which was itself a tribute in writing to Socrates’ style of life and talk.*
In some of the dialogues, particularly some that can be dated to late in Plato’s life, the conversational form withers away, and they do function almost as treatises. In a few, characters other than Socrates do not express much more than puzzlement, agreement, or admiration. But for the most part, the dialogue form is an active presence, and this affects in more than one way our relations to Plato’s ideas. In some dialogues, no one offers a definite conclusion, and we find that we have been presented with a question, a refutation, or a puzzle. This particularly applies to those which we can take to have been written in Plato’s earlier years, but it is also true, to a considerable extent, of a notably powerful later dialogue, the Theaetetus.7 Even when an authoritative figure in a dialogue, usually Socrates, seems to leave us with a conclusion or theory to be taken away from it, we should not necessarily suppose that this is what Plato is telling us to believe.
Not everything asserted in a dialogue, even by Socrates, has been asserted by Plato: Socrates asserting may be Plato suggesting. Because Plato is an immensely serious philosopher, who indeed set philosophy on the path of claiming to address our deepest concerns by means of argument, orderly enquiry, and intellectual imagination, and because we project on to him images of seriousness which are drawn from other philosophy9 and from later experience, we may well underestimate the extent to which he could combine intensity, pessimism, and even a certain religious solemnity, with an ironical gaiety and an incapacity to take all his own ideas equally seriously. It is a weakness of scholars who study philosophers to think that philosophers are just like scholars, and it is particularly a mistake in the case of Plato. Plato gathered about him a group of people who pursued philosophical discussion, teaching and enquiries into mathematics and astronomy. This gave rise, eventually, to a new kind of institution, a place for what we would now call ‘research’. From the public space on the edge of Athens in which Plato carried on his discussions, it was called the Academy10, and in this way Plato gave the word ‘academic’ to the world, but it is an irony that he should have done so. We should not be trapped into thinking of him as a professor.
This point bears on a passage which itself raises a question of how far we should trust his written works. Towards the end of the Phaedrus11, there is this conversation:
SOCRATES: Well, then, someone who thinks that he can set down an art in writing, and equally someone who accepts something from writing as though it were going to be clear and reliable, must be very simple-minded . . . how can they possibly think that words which have been written down can do more than serve as a reminder to those who already know what the writing is about?
PHAEDRUS: Quite right.
SOCRATES: You know, Phaedrus, writing shares a strange feature with painting. The offspring of painting stand there as if they were alive, but if anyone asks them anything, they are solemnly silent. The same is true of written words. You’d think they were speaking as if they had some understanding, but if you question anything that has been said because you want to learn more, it gives just the same message over and over. Once it has been written down, every discourse rolls about everywhere, reaching just as much those with understanding as those who have no business with it, and it does not know to whom it should speak and to whom not. And when it is faulted and attacked unfairly, it always needs its father’s support; alone, it cannot defend itself or come to its own support.
PHAEDRUS: You are quite right about that too.
SOCRATES: Now tell me, can we discern another kind of discourse, a legitimate brother of this one? Can we say how it comes about, and how much better and more capable it naturally is?
PHAEDRUS: Which one is that? How do you say it comes about?
SOCRATES: It is a discourse that is written down, with knowledge, in the soul of the listener; it can defend itself, and it knows to whom it should speak, and with whom it should remain silent.
PHAEDRUS: You mean the living, breathing discourse of the man who knows, of which the written one can fairly be called an image.
SOCRATES: Exactly—and tell me this. Would a farmer who was sensible and cared about his seeds and wanted them to yield fruit plant them in all seriousness in the gardens of Adonis in the middle of summer and enjoy watching them become fine plants in a week? Or would he do this as an amusement and in honour of the holiday, if he did it at all? Wouldn’t he use his knowledge of farming to plant the seeds he cared for when it was appropriate, and be satisfied if they bore fruit eight months later?
PHAEDRUS: That’s how he would handle those he was serious about, Socrates, quite differently from the others, as you say.
SOCRATES: Now what about the man who knows what is just, noble and good? Shall we say that he is less sensible with his seeds than the farmer is with his?
PHAEDRUS: Certainly not.
SOCRATES: Therefore he wouldn’t be serious if he wrote them in ink, sowing them, through a pen, with words that are unable to speak in their own defence and unable to teach the truth properly.
PHAEDRUS: He surely wouldn’t.
SOCRATES: No—he is likely to sow gardens of writing just for fun, and to write, when he writes, to store up reminders for himself when he arrives at old age and forgetfulness, and for other people who follow in his footsteps, and he will like to see them sweetly blooming; and while others take up other amusements, refreshing themselves with drinking parties and such things, he is likely to enjoy himself, rather, like this.
PHAEDRUS: Socrates, you are contrasting a vulgar amusement with a very fine one—with the amusement of a man who can while away his time telling stories of justice and the other things you mentioned.
SOCRATES: That’s just how it is, Phaedrus. But there is a much finer concern about these things—that of someone who uses the art of dialectic, and takes a suitable soul and plants and sows discourse accompanied with knowledge: discourse which is capable of helping itself and the sower, which is not barren but produces a seed from which other discourse grows in other lives, and in turn can go on to make the seed immortal, making the man who has it as happy as any man can be.
Phaedrus, 275c–277a
By ‘the art of dialectic’ here Socrates means argument in speech, teaching through conversation. There has been discussion of why Plato, after this, should have gone on writing. But even if we take Socrates’ remarks (a little stolidly, perhaps) entirely at their face value, they do not mean that Plato should not write—they give him a reason to write, and that reason is obviously only one among similar reasons we might imagine. This passage does not mean the end of philosophical writing. But it does express an important idea about the limitations of philosophical writing, an idea which, I shall suggest, is important in relation to the spirit in which Plato wrote his works and the spirit in which we should read them.
PLATO’S DEVELOPMENT
A complication in trying to extract Plato’s philosophy from the dialogues is that they do not all present the same philosophy, and his views and interests, not surprisingly, changed over time. It is thus very important to establish, if we can, the order in which the dialogues were written. There are various sorts of evidence that can be brought to bear on this. There are occasionally references to historical events. Some dialogues refer explicitly or by implication to others. There is a technique called ‘stylometry’, which treats certain features of Plato’s style statistically to establish gradual changes in them over time. In addition, there is the content of the various dialogues, in terms of which we can try to make sense of Plato’s philosophical development. Here there is an obvious danger that we shall fall into a circle, dating the dialogues in terms of their ideas, and working out the development of the ideas from the order of the dialogues. However, with the help of all these methods together, scholars have arrived at a fair measure of agreement.
The earliest is a group of short dialogues often called ‘Socratic’ because the role played by Socrates does not go beyond what, it is generally thought, can reasonably be ascribed to the historical Socrates himself. There is then a pair of dialogues, the Gorgias and the Meno, which, as we shall see, seem to mark a transition from the concerns of the Socratic dialogues to those of Plato’s Middle Period, in which, as everyone now agrees, he goes beyond the interests of the historical Socrates, and develops very distinctive ideas of his own. The Middle Period contains what may be the most famous of his dialogues, the Phaedo, the Symposium, and the Republic.13 These dialogues have particularly helped to form the traditional picture of ‘the Platonic philosophy’, which contrasts with the everyday physical world of appearance a realm of intellectual, eternal objects, which are the objects of real knowledge and can be directly attained, in some sense, by the immortal soul. These objects are called ‘Forms’, and we shall be concerned later with questions of what Plato thought they could explain, and how far he had a consistent theory of them.
These famous dialogues of the Middle Period were not by any means Plato’s last word, and among the hardest questions in Platonic scholarship is to decide exactly which dialogues are later than the Middle Period, and to form a picture of how much, and in what ways, Plato may have changed his mind and his approach as he got older. The late dialogues include the Theaetetus, Sophist, Statesman, Philebus and Laws.14 The last (from which Socrates has finally disappeared) is probably the least read of Plato’s major dialogues: it is a long discussion, in twelve books, of political and social arrangements, in a more realistic but also much darker tone than that of the Republic.
There are two dialogues that, together, give rise to problems of dating in a particularly acute form. On stylometric grounds, the Timaeus seems to be a late dialogue. However, it gives an elaborate account of the creation of things by a ‘demiurge’ who imposes form on matter (there is no question in Plato of a divine creation of the world from nothing, as in the Christian tradition), and it refers to the Forms in terms very similar to those used in Middle Period works such as, above all, the Republic. On the other hand, the Parmenides, which cannot be distinguished stylistically from Middle Period dialogues, contains a number of extremely serious criticisms of those ways of talking about Forms, criticisms which many, including Aristotle, have regarded as fatal. They occur in the first part of the dialogue, where a very young Socrates is represented conversing with the old and sage figure of Parmenides, who in fact wrote a bold metaphysical poem claiming the unity of everything and the impossibility of change, and who was held in great respect by Plato.15 (It is just possible, in terms of dates, that Socrates should have met Parmenides, very unlikely that he did so, and quite certain that they could not have had such a conversation.) Socrates advances an account of Forms to which Parmenides (virtually quoting from the Phaedo), makes a series of objections which Socrates cannot answer. Parmenides says that he needs training in ‘dialectic’ (which was, significantly, Plato’s favourite term for more than one method in philosophy which, at various times, he found most promising). He suggests that Socrates listen to a demonstration on a theme taken from Parmenides’ companion and pupil, Zeno, 16 and is prevailed upon to mount the demonstration himself. The second part of the dialogue consists of a very elaborate set of entirely abstract arguments, the content, and indeed the whole point, of which are still not agreed.
On one picture of Plato’s development, he started with the modest methods of enquiry that he acquired from Socrates. He then developed a ‘theory of Forms’, with the very ambitious doctrines, particularly about immortality, that are associated with it in the Republic, the Phaedo, and the Symposium. He then became convinced that there were deep difficulties with the theory, difficulties which are expressed in the Parmenides. Then, in later works, notably the Theaetetus, Sophist, and Statesman, which are without doubt more technical, he pursued in much more severely analytical detail problems that had been latent in the grand theories of the Middle Period.
I think that there is some truth in this schema17 and some of what I say about Plato’s outlook will be in this spirit, but we should not be tied to any simple version of it. In particular, we should not ask whether or when Plato gave up ‘the Theory of Forms’, because, as we shall see, there is no Theory of Forms. In any case, it is artificial18 to discuss these matters as though Plato wrote his dialogues in an order, in the sense that he always finished one before starting another. He may have had more than one unfinished at once; still more, the ideas that appeared in various dialogues were at work in his head at the same time.
Above all, it is a mistake to suppose that Plato spends his time in the various dialogues adding to or subtracting from his system. Each dialogue is about whatever it is about, and Plato pursues what seems interesting and fruitful in that connection. We often cannot know, in fact, exactly what made a consideration seem to him interesting and fruitful at a given point. Plato was recognizably, I think, one of those creative thinkers and artists—it is not true of all, including some of the greatest—who are an immensely rich source of thoughts and images, too many, perhaps, for them all to have their place and use. We may think of him as driven forward by his ideas, curious at any given point to see what will happen if some striking conjunction of them is given its head. We should not think of him as constantly keeping his accounts, anxious of how his system will look in the history of philosophy.
THE SOCRATIC DIALOGUES
In the early dialogues Socrates typically appears discussing with one or more characters a question about the nature of the virtues, and refutes some claim to knowledge which they have made, while offering his habitual disclaimer to the effect that he himself knows nothing. To this extent, the dialogues are ‘aporetic’, that is to say, negative in their outcome, but there is often some significant suggestion in the offing. In the Laches, a characteristic example, Socrates is asked by two distinguished citizens, Nicias and Laches, whether young men should be trained to fight in armour; he draws them into a discussion about the nature of courage. Their commonsensical suggestions are refuted, and no conclusion is reached. By the end, however, Socrates has implicitly advanced a distinctive view, by associating the virtue of courage with knowledge, as he does elsewhere with other virtues. Moreover, the dramatic frame of the dialogue introduces a theme which was to be of constant concern to Plato, and which is brought to focus later in the Meno: how is it that worthy people in an earlier generation, who basically, if unreflectively, lived by decent values, were unable, as Plato believed, to pass them on to their children?
One of the dialogues that is assigned to the early group on grounds of its style and, in general terms, its content, is the Protagoras, but it is a strikingly special case. Socrates tells how he was woken early in the morning by an enthusiastic friend wanting him to come to a house where they could see the great teacher, Protagoras, who is visiting Athens. Protagoras is a ‘sophist’, someone who takes fees for teaching, in particular for teaching young people how to be successful and happy. Plato repeatedly attacks such people, and it is to him, principally, that they owe their bad reputation, but he clearly had a genuine respect for Protagoras. He comes out very well from this dialogue, and later, in the Theaetetus, though he does not appear himself, Plato discusses as his invention a sophisticated theory based on his well-known saying, ‘man is the measure of all things.’
Admitted to the house, Socrates and his friend find Protagoras surrounded by admirers, and there is also a notable group of other sophists, sketched by Plato with a lightly malicious touch. Socrates raises the question whether virtue can be taught. Protagoras gives a long and brilliant speech in which he tells a story about the natural defencelessness of human beings and their survival through their intelligence and inventiveness, and he lays out what may be seen as a theory of knowledge for democracy:20 virtue can be taught, but, unlike the arts, where there is a division of labour and conspicuous experts, in the matter of virtue citizens teach their children and each other.
Plato gives Protagoras a compelling and thoughtful expression of such an outlook, though it is exactly what he himself rejected. He himself came to believe that there were distinctive kinds of knowledge that must underlie virtue, and the project of the Republic is to design a social order which will indeed be authoritarian, because it will use political power to express the authority of knowledge. There is no place in this for democracy. Plato typically compares a democratic city to a ship navigated by majority vote of the passengers, and in the Republic it is represented in hostile and embittered terms, as, in the Gorgias, the greatest of Athenian democratic leaders, Pericles21, is brutally attacked as a demagogue. Here, however, Protagoras is allowed to offer a different and more benign conception. It is an example of something that is one of Plato’s strengths, even if his polemics sometimes conceal it—that he can understand, not just the force of contrary arguments, but the power of an opposing vision.
In the course of the exchanges that follow, Socrates demands, as he often does in the presence of sophists and teachers of rhetoric, that there should be a real conversation, proceeding by question and answer, and that there should be no long speeches. The idea (which no doubt came from the historical Socrates himself) is that only through question and answer is it possible to construct and follow a logical argument, which will actually prove or disprove a definite conclusion: speeches allow irrelevance, bad logic, and misleading emotional appeals. Quite often, characters in the dialogues complain about Socrates’ method. Even if they do not put it in quite these terms, they might be said to see the question and answer form as itself a rhetorical contrivance, one that helps Socrates to force his opponents down a favoured train of thought, often a chain of misleading analogies, instead of giving them a chance to stand back and ask what other kinds of consideration might bear on the issue. The criticism certainly occurs to many of Plato’s readers.
When Socrates’ procedure invites that criticism, one must in any case ask, as I suggested earlier, whether Plato necessarily expects the reader to accept his argument or to question it. But there is a further point, that we should not assume that ‘the force of argument’ is an entirely fixed and determinate notion. It is not so anyway, and it is less so in Plato, for the special reason that he more or less invented the idea.22 What one sees in his dialogues is a process, of his seeking in many different ways to distinguish sound argument from the mere power of persuasive speech, as it might be heard in an Athenian law court, for instance. Ancient Greeks, and particularly, perhaps, the notoriously litigious and political Athenians, were very impressed by the power of speech. It is significant that the common Greek word logos had semantic roots in both speech and reason; it can mean ‘word’, ‘utterance’, ‘story’, ‘account’, ‘explanation’, ‘reason’, and ‘ratio’, among other things. One of Plato’s major and on-going undertakings was to construct models of what it is for an utterance not just to tell a story but to give a reason.
In the Protagoras, after his protests against speeches, Socrates makes a long one himself, which is an engaging parody of another sophistic method, that of advancing a view by commenting on a poem, a method which he shows, in effect, can be used to prove anything you like.23 He then turns to refuting Protagoras’s position, but this, too, takes a strange turn, since he claims as the basis of his argument that the only good is pleasure, something that Plato himself quite certainly did not believe. At the end of this brilliantly inventive dialogue, the two protagonists, Socrates and Protagoras, find themselves in a puzzling situation, with great respect for each other, and much work still to be done:
—I have only one more question to ask you. Do you still believe, as you did at first, that some men are extremely ignorant and yet still very courageous?
—I think you just want to win the argument, Socrates, and that is why you are forcing me to answer. So I will gratify you and say that on the basis of what we have agreed upon, it seems to me to be impossible.
—I have no other reason for asking these things than my desire to answer these questions about virtue, especially what virtue is in itself. For I know that if we could get clear on that, then we would be able to settle the question about which we both have had much to say: I, that virtue cannot be taught, you, that it can. It seems to me that the recent outcome of our argument has turned on us like a person making fun of us, and that if it had a voice it would say ‘Socrates and Protagoras, how strange you are, both of you. Socrates, you said earlier that virtue cannot be taught, but now you are insisting on the opposite, trying to show that everything is knowledge—justice, temperance, courage—in which case virtue would appear to be eminently teachable. On the other hand, if virtue is something other than knowledge, as Protagoras has been trying to say, then clearly it would not be teachable. But if it turns out to be wholly knowledge, as you are now insisting, Socrates, it would be very surprising indeed if virtue could not be taught. Protagoras maintained at first that it could be taught, but now he thinks the opposite, urging that hardly any of the virtues turn out to be knowledge. On that view, it hardly could be true that it was teachable.’
Now, Protagoras, seeing that everything is upside down and in a terrible confusion, I am most eager to clear it all up, and I would like us, having come this far, to continue until we come through to what virtue is in itself, and then to enquire once more whether it can or can-not be taught . . . If you are willing, as I said at the beginning, I would be pleased to investigate these things along with you.
—Socrates, I commend your enthusiasm and your ability to find your way through an argument. I really don’t think I am a bad man, and certainly I am the last man to be envious. Indeed, I have told many people that I admire you more than anyone I have met, certainly more than anyone in your generation. And I say that I would not be surprised if you came to be very well regarded for wisdom. We shall examine these matters later, whenever you wish. But now the time has come to turn to other things.
Protagoras, 360d–361e
VIRTUE IS NOT YET KNOWLEDGE
The question whether virtue can be taught is taken up in the Meno, and again it leads to another: how can one answer this question if one does not already know what virtue is? To ask what a particular virtue is, is a standard Socratic move, as he asked about courage in the Laches, but now Plato explains rather more fully than he had earlier what the answer to any such question might be like. It cannot consist of a list of examples—that will not show what the examples have in common. It cannot merely be a characteristic that necessarily goes with the item in question: we cannot say, for instance, that shape is ‘the only thing that always accompanies colour’24—that is true, perhaps, but it does not explain what shape is. This discussion of method gives us some ideas that were implicit in Socratic questioning, but were not all clearly recognized. One is that the account we are looking for (in this case, of virtue) must be explanatory—it must not simply capture an adequate definition of the word, but must give us insight into what virtue is. This in turn raises the possibility that the account may have to be part of a larger theory.
A further idea is that the account will not leave everything where it was. It may revise the ideas that people typically have of the virtues. Indeed, it may well require them to change their lives. That, certainly, was part of Socrates’ project, even if it was not clear how it could be so. The distinctively Platonic idea, which begins to grow in the Meno, is that it is theory that, in one way or another, must change one’s life.
But now Meno finds an obstacle to the search for what virtue is:
MENO: How will you look for something, Socrates, when you do not know at all what it is? What sort of thing will you set as the target of your search, among the things you do not know? If you did meet with it, how would you know that this was the thing that you did not know?
SOCRATES: I understand what you want to say, Meno. Do you realize that this is a debater’s argument you are bringing up: that a man cannot search either for what he knows or for what he does not know? He cannot search for what he knows—since he knows it, there is no need for a search; nor for what he does not know, since he does not know what to look for.
MENO: Does that argument not seem sound to you, Socrates?
SOCRATES: Not to me.
MENO: Can you tell me why?
SOCRATES: I can.
And he goes on to say something which in terms of the earlier dialogues is extraordinary:
SOCRATES: I have heard from men and women who are wise about divine things . . .
MENO: What do they say?
SOCRATES: Something, I thought, both true and beautiful.
MENO: What is it, and who are they?
SOCRATES: Those who say it are among the priests and priestesses whose care it is to be able to give an account of their practices. Pindar too says it, and many other poets, those who are divine. What they say is this; see whether you think they speak the truth. They say that the human soul is immortal; at times it comes to an end, which they call dying, at times it is reborn, but it is never destroyed. So one must live as holy a life as possible:
Persephone will receive the debt of ancient wrong;
In the ninth year she will give back their souls to the sun above.
And from these there will grow noble kings, and men great instrength and skill,
And for the rest of time they shall be called sacred heroes.
As the soul is immortal and has been born often and has seen everything here and in the underworld, there is nothing that it has not learned; so it is not surprising that it can recollect the things it knew before, about virtue and about other things. As the whole of nature is akin, and the soul has learned everything, nothing prevents a man, after he has recalled just one thing—the process that people call learning—discovering everything else for himself, if he is brave and does not tire of the search; for searching and learning are simply recollection.
Meno 80d–81d
These are stories, Socrates admits, not demonstrations, but perhaps there can be a demonstration. He summons a slave boy, and, in a famous scene, gets him, merely by questioning him, to see the solution to a geometrical problem which he had never even heard of at the beginning of their conversation. How can this be possible? Socrates’ suggestion is that the demonstration reminded the boy of the answer; he knew it already, but until now had forgotten it. Since he knew it already, he must have learned it already; but he did not learn it in this life, so he learned it in an earlier life. The soul is immortal.
It is not much of an argument. There is in any case an objection, that even if we have been shown by this episode that the boy’s soul existed earlier, there is nothing here to show that it will exist later—pre-existence is less than immortality. Plato fills in the missing piece by pure sleight of hand.26 But there is a deeper and more interesting problem. It is often objected to in this scene that Socrates leads the boy in the demonstration. This misses the point. If the question had been one in history or geography, the boy could not, in any comparable way, have come to see the answer: in such subjects, if one does not know, one does not know. It is essential that the exercise is in mathematics and involves what is called a priori knowledge, knowledge which is independent of experience. Plato offers here the first theory of such knowledge.
The demonstration may well show something about how we become conscious of a priori knowledge. Indeed, many philosophers have agreed with Plato to this extent, that such knowledge is in some sense innate. Very few, however, have agreed that this has anything to do with an earlier existence. For why should we say that there was some more direct way in which the boy must have originally learned it? Learning in the way that the boy has just learned, the way displayed in the demonstration, is how we learn mathematics: how could there be some more direct, original, way of doing so? Plato thinks, or will come to think, that there is an answer to this question, that the naked soul once saw mathematical objects directly by the eye of the intellect. But how could such a process possibly be a way of coming to know mathematics? It is a strange, and typically metaphysical, reversal; Plato praises reason over sense perception, the intellectual over the material, but, trying to give an account of a priori knowledge, he straight off interprets it as an intellectual version of sense perception.
Socrates says that the boy does not yet properly know this mathematical truth (in this life), because he has no secure hold on it, will no doubt forget it, and, most importantly, cannot explain it. At the moment it is a mere belief, which will become knowledge only if it is ‘tied down by a chain of reasoning’. Later on in the Meno, he illustrates this important distinction between knowledge and true belief by a different sort of example. He contrasts a man who knows the way to Larissa, 27 because he has been there, with one who simply happens to have got it right. Put like this, the distinction is not confined to any particular subject matter: if you have a true belief, and you have the reasons, the backing, or the experience appropriate to that kind of belief, then you have knowledge. This does not suggest, as the experiment with the geometry problem might perhaps suggest, that only a priori knowledge is really knowledge. Still less does it suggest—indeed, it contradicts the suggestion—that knowledge might have one subject matter and belief another. As we shall see, Plato does come to some such position in the Republic, but that is to move a long way, and in a rather perverse direction, from what is first offered in the Meno.
Socrates uses the Meno’s distinction between knowledge and true belief to answer the familiar question: how can decent men have failed to teach their sons to have their own virtues? He and Meno, even though they do not know what virtue is, have agreed to conduct their argument on an assumption: if virtue is knowledge, then it must be teachable. Certainly virtue has not been taught. The sophists claim to do so, but if they have any effect at all, it is to make their pupils worse people. More significantly, worthy men, who care above all that their sons should share their virtues, have failed to bring this about. So, it seems, virtue is not teachable, and therefore, on the assumption which they have accepted, it is not knowledge. That is, in a way, correct, but given the Meno’s distinction, it does not mean that virtue could not become knowledge. What we learn from the worthy men’s experience is only that their virtue was not knowledge. It was not nothing, however: they did have virtue, but it took the form of true belief. That worked all right for them in practice, just as a true belief about the road to Larissa will get you there, and will enable you to lead others there if they are actually with you. It does not enable you to teach another to get there by himself. But if we could find the right chains of reasoning to tie these beliefs down, so they do not run away, then they might become knowledge, and then they could be taught. Philosophy will provide those chains of reasoning, and this is how it will change our lives.
That Plato should present Socrates as making this point has a special pathos about it, for the most striking instance of someone who failed to teach his virtue was Socrates himself. Socrates had a pupil and a lover, 28 Alcibiades, who was very talented and, it seems, very beautiful. His life was a disaster: vain and petulant, he betrayed Athens and others as well, and died a ruined man. The case of Alcibiades was a reproach to Socrates as a teacher, and Plato’s recurrent and developing concern with the issues discussed in the Meno is a response to that reproach, an ongoing apology. In the Symposium Plato confronts squarely the relations between Socrates and Alcibiades, and one of the less obvious features of that wonderful dialogue is the ethical assurance with which he does so. In his own contribution to the series of speeches, Socrates had already said that the goddess Diotima had told him29 that he himself would not reach the highest level of intellectual love, which in outline she describes to him, love in the presence of the Form of beauty; this signals the metaphysical deficit, so to speak, which Plato diagnosed in Socrates’ experience. Alcibiades, drunk, bursts into the party after the speeches (his part has to be something separate, dramatic, not a contribution under the rules of the occasion). He gives a vivid account of Socrates, and of their strange relations. It is an encomium, and we are to take it as true; it reveals some understanding; but at the same time it shows that, whatever might possibly be learned from Socrates, Alcibiades, inside an invincible vanity, could not learn it.
THE ETHICAL CHALLENGE
It was not merely that decent people did not manage to pass on their values, because they did not grasp and could not explain reasons for leading a decent life. There were also people who argued that there was no reason to lead a decent life, and that the best idea would be a life of ruthless self-interest. How many people argued this as a philosophic position we do not know, but certainly there was a social attitude, to the effect that the conventional values of justice—to behave fairly and cooperatively, keep one’s word, consider others’ interests—were a racket, which was encouraged by people who were intelligent and powerful and did not need to live like this themselves.
There are two characters in the dialogues who express this view. One, the more colourful and formidable, is Callicles in the Gorgias. Callicles’ first speech offers a powerfully expressed challenge both to the life of justice and to the activity of philosophy, as contrasted with a political life in which one can exercise power. Besides the reference to Socrates’ trial and execution, perhaps one can hear, too, what Plato knew might be said of himself if he had got it wrong about applying his talents to philosophy:
We mould the best and the most powerful among us, taking them while they’re still young, like lion cubs, and with charms and incantations we subdue them into slavery, telling them that one is supposed to get no more than his fair share, and that this is what is fair and just. But I believe that if there were to be a man whose nature was up to it, one who had shaken off, torn apart, and escaped all this, who had trampled under foot our documents, our trickery and charms, and all those laws that are against nature—he, the slave, would rise up and be revealed as our master, and then the justice of nature would shine out . . .
Philosophy is no doubt a charming thing, Socrates, if someone is exposed to it in moderation at the appropriate time of life. But if one spends more time on it than he should, it is the undoing of mankind. For even if someone has great natural advantages, if he engages in philosophy far beyond the appropriate time of life, he will inevitably turn out to be inexperienced in all those things in which a man has to be experienced if he is to be admirable and good and well thought of. Such people have no experience of the laws of their city or of the kind of speech one must use to deal with people on matters of business, public or private; they have no experience in human pleasures and appetites; no experience, in short, of human character altogether. So when they venture into some private or political activity, they become a laughing stock . . .
So when I see an older man still engaging in philosophy and not giving it up, I think such a man by this time needs a flogging. As I was just saying, such a man, even with natural advantages, will end up becoming unmanly and avoiding the middle of the city and its meeting places—where, as the poet said, men become really distinguished— and will slink away for the rest of his life, whispering with three or four boys in a corner, never coming out with anything free-spirited, important, or worth anyone’s attention . . .
As it is, if someone got hold of you or of anyone else like you and took you off to prison on the charge that you’re doing something un-just when you’re not, be assured that you wouldn’t be able to do yourself any good. You would get dizzy, your mouth would hang open, and you would not know what to say. You would come up for trial and face some no-good wretch of an accuser and be put to death, if death is what he wanted as your sentence. How can this be a wise thing, Socrates, ‘the craft which took a well-favoured man and made him worse’, not able to protect himself or to rescue himself or anyone else from the gravest dangers, to be robbed by his enemies, and to live a life without honour in the city? To put it rather crudely, you could give such a man a smack on the jaw and get away with it. Listen to me, friend, and stop this refuting. ‘Practise the sweet music of an active life and do it where you’ll get a reputation for being intelligent. Leave these subtleties to others’—whether we call them merely silly, or outright nonsense—‘which will cause you to live in empty houses’, and do not envy those who go in for these fiddling refutations, but those who have a life, and fame, and many other good things as well.
Gorgias, 483e–486d (with omissions)
Socrates has already had two conversations before Callicles appears, and they are carefully structured to show how radical Callicles’ outlook is. The first speaker is Gorgias, a famous orator and teacher of rhetoric, who gives a defence of his profession. Plato believes that this profession is dangerous and its claims to any expertise hollow, and in this notably angry dialogue he goes on to denounce the rhetorician as a technician of mere appearances, like someone who serves the sick with rich and un-healthy pastries or paints the face of the dying. But Gorgias himself is treated with some respect. He indeed gives a respectable defence: he thinks that his skills serve the cause of justice, that the life of justice is worth living, and that to be a just person is kalon—a significant ethical term for the Greeks, which means that it is worthy of admiration, and that a person would properly be well regarded and would have self-respect for living such a life.
He is succeeded in the conversation (as, Plato believes, also in social reality) by a younger and more belligerent figure, who is called Polus. He thinks that the life of justice is not reasonable; given an alternative, it is not worth pursuing. Under Socrates’ questioning, 30 however, he makes the mistake of admitting both that justice is kalon, worth admiring, and also (reasonably) that something worth admiring is worth pursuing. Having said that justice is not worth pursuing, he is faced, Socrates shows him, with a contradiction. Granted that he thinks that we have reason to do what will make us admired, and no reason to do what will make us feel foolish or ashamed of ourselves—that is to say, he still attaches value to the kalon—he should not go on saying that just behaviour is to be admired and injustice is something to be ashamed of. This is what Callicles, stormily breaking into the conversation, points out. It is a purely conventional idea, he insists, which must be given up if we are going to have a realistic view of what is worth doing. Callicles himself does still subscribe to the value of the kalon, but he does not apply it to justice. He thinks that a reasonable person will want to be admired and envied, to think well of himself, and not to be an object of contempt, but the way to bring this about is through power and the exploitation of others, having no concern for justice. Implicit in this, indeed very near the surface of it, is the idea that people do secretly admire the successful exploiter and despise the virtuously exploited, whatever they say about the value of justice.
Socrates does refute Callicles, but only by forcing him into a position which, critics have thought, he has no reason to accept. He ends up31 defending a crudely gluttonous form of hedonism, which not many people are likely to envy. But this, surely, was not supposed to be the idea. The successfully unjust man was supposed to be a rather grand and powerful figure, whom others, if they were honest, would admire and envy, but he has ended up in Socrates’ refutation as a squalid addict whom anyone with any taste would despise. It is easy to think that Socrates wins the argument only because Plato has changed the subject. But Plato does not suppose that he has changed the subject. His point is that without some idea of values that apply to people generally, there will be no basis for any kind of admiration, and if Callicles wants still to think of himself in terms of the kalon, he will have to hold on to something more than bare egoism, which by itself offers nothing for admiration and really does lead only to an unstructured and unrewarding hedonism. Plato himself, of course, believes something that goes beyond this, that only a life of justice can offer the structure and order that are needed to make any life worth living.
This is what the Republic is meant to show: ‘It is not a trivial question we are discussing, ’ Socrates says towards the end of the first book of that dialogue: ‘what we are talking about is how one should live.’32 He says it to Thrasymachus, Plato’s other (and rhetorically less impressive) representative of the enemies of justice. Thrasymachus has been defending the idea that if a person has a reason to act justly, it will always be because it does somebody else some good.33 It is not very hard for Socrates to refute this in the version that Thrasymachus offers; attached as he is to the rather flashy formula ‘justice is the interest of the stronger’, Thrasymachus has not noticed that the ‘stronger’ typically take the form of a group, a collective agent (such as the people in the Athenian democracy), and that they can be a collective agent only because they individually follow rules of justice.
This leads naturally to the idea that justice is not so much a device of the strong to exploit the weak, as a device of the weak to make themselves strong. This idea is spelled out in Book II by two further speakers, Glaucon and Adeimantus, who say that they do not want to believe it themselves, but that they need to have it refuted by Socrates. It is bound to seem to us ethically a lot more attractive than Thrasymachus’s proposition: it is the origin, in fact, of the social contract theories that have played an important part in later political philosophy. It is interesting, then, that Glaucon and Adeimantus, as much as Socrates himself, regard this position as only a more effective variant of Thrasymachus’s.34 The reason for this is that on this account justice still comes out as a second best. Just as much as in Thrasymachus’s cruder account, it is an instrument or device for satisfying one’s desires. An adequate defence of justice, Plato thought, must show that it is rational for each person to want to be just, whatever his circumstances, and the suggestion of Glaucon and Adeimantus fails this test: if someone were powerful and intelligent and well enough placed, he would reasonably have no interest in justice. What Socrates must show is that justice is prized not simply for its effects, but for its own sake.
But why is this the demand? Why is the standard for a defence of justice raised so high? The answer fully emerges only after one has followed the whole long discussion of the Republic. That discussion takes the form of considering justice both in an individual and in a city, and Plato constructs a complex analogy between the two. He discusses in great detail what the institutions of a just city must be. He pursues this, as indeed Socrates makes clear, for its own sake, but the main features of the analogy are needed to answer the question about the value of justice ‘in itself’, and indeed to show why that has to be the question in the first place. A just person is one in whom reason rules, as opposed to the other two ‘parts’ of the soul that Plato distinguishes, 35 a ‘spirited’, combative and competitive, part, and a part that consists of hedonistic desires. Just people, who will have this balance and stability in their soul, need to be brought up in a just city, one that is governed by its own rational element; that is to say, by a class of people who are themselves like this. Those people certainly need to see justice as a good in itself; there is nothing to make them pursue it except their own understanding of justice and of the good. They will be able to do this, since their education will give them a philosophical understanding of the good, and of why justice represents the proper development of the rational soul. So, Plato hoped, the Republic would have answered the question about the transmission of virtue from one generation to another: it could be brought about only in a just city, and a just city must be one in which the authority of reason is represented politically, by the unquestioned authority of a class of Guardians who—and Socrates recognizes that it will be seen as a very surprising solution—have been educated in philosophy.
In one sense, the foundation of a just city is supposed to be the final, the only, answer to the question of how to keep justice alive. But even in the Republic Plato does not suppose that it could in practice be a final answer, for no earthly institution can last uncorrupted, and even if we imagine the city coming about, it will ultimately degenerate, in a process which Plato lays out in Books VIII and IX. There is a parallel story about the effects of the ethical degeneration among individual people, and together they give an opportunity, not only for an evaluation of different kinds of society, but for a good deal of social and psychological observation.
OUT OF THE CAVE
Books V to VII of the Republic are devoted for the most part to the education of the Guardians, and they also express some of Plato’s highest metaphysical ambitions. This is because the further reaches of what the Guardians learn extend to a reality which in some sense lies beyond everyday experience, and it is only an encounter with this reality that secures the firm hold on the good that underlies the stability of their own characters and their just governance of the city. (It is worth mentioning that Plato says that women should not, as such, be excluded from the highest and most abstract studies, an idea that sets him apart from most of his contemporaries and, as often, from the more conventional Aristotle.36)
Plato pictures the progress of the soul under education in terms of an ascent from what, in a vivid and very famous image, he represents as the ordinary condition of human beings:
—Next, compare our nature, and the effect of its having or not having education, to this experience. Picture human beings living in an underground dwelling like a cave, with a long entrance open to the light, as wide as the cave. They are there from childhood, with chains on their legs and their necks so that they stay where they are and can only see in front of them, unable to turn their heads because of the fetters. Light comes from a fire which is burning higher up and some way behind them; and also higher up, between the fire and the prisoners, there is a road along which a low wall is built, like the screen in front of puppeteers above which they show their puppets.
—I can picture it.
—Now imagine that there are men along this wall, carrying all sorts of implements which reach above the wall, and figures of men and animals in stone and wood and every material, and some of the men who are doing this speak, presumably, and others remain silent.
—It is a strange image you are describing, and strange prisoners.
—They are like us: for do you think that they would see anything of themselves or each other except the shadows that were cast by the fire on the wall in front of them?
—How could they, if they are forced to keep their heads motionless for all their lives?
—And what about the objects that are being carried along the wall?Wouldn’t it be the same?
—Of course.
—And if they could talk to each other, don’t you think they would suppose that the names they used applied to the things passing before them?
—Certainly.
—And if the prison had an echo from the wall facing them? Wouldn’t they suppose that it was the shadow going by that was speaking, whenever one of those carrying the objects spoke?
—Of course.
—Altogether then, they would believe that the truth was nothing other than the shadows of those objects.
—They would indeed.
—But now consider what it would be like for them to be released from their bonds and cured of their illusions, if such a thing could happen to them. When one of them was freed and forced suddenly to stand up and turn his head and walk and look up towards the light, doing all these things he would be in pain, and because he was dazzled he would not be able to see the things of which he had earlier seen the shadows. What do you think he would reply if someone said to him that what he had seen earlier was empty illusion, but that now he is rather closer to reality, and turned to things that are more real, and sees more correctly?Don’t you think he would be at a loss and would think that the things he saw earlier were truer than the things he was now being shown?
—Much truer.
—And if he were forced to look at the light itself, wouldn’t his eyes hurt, and wouldn’t he turn away and run back to the things he was able to see, and think that they were really clearer than the things that he had been shown?
—Yes.
—And if someone dragged him by force up the rough steep path, and did not let him go until he had been dragged out into the light of the sun, wouldn’t he be in pain and complain at being dragged like this, and when he got to the light, with the sun filling his eyes, wouldn’t he be unable to see a single one of the things now said to be true?
—He would, at least at first.
—He would need practice, if he were going to see the things above. First he would most easily see shadows, and then the images of men and other things reflected in water, and then those things themselves; and the things in the heavens and the heavens themselves he would see more easily at night, looking at the light of the moon and the stars, than he could see the sun and its light by day.
—Certainly.
—Finally he would be able to look at the sun itself, not reflected in water or in anything else, but as it is in itself and in its own place: to look at it and see what kind of thing it is.
Republic, 514a–516b
This image brings together two different ideas of what is wrong with the empirical world and with the skills, such as rhetoric, that live off it and its politics of illusion: that it is all empty appearance, and that nevertheless it involves coercive forces (symbolized by the chains) from which people need to be freed. The everyday world, with its sensations, desires, and inducements, is at once flimsy and powerful. In this it resembles what later times would understand as magic: the world that Prospero brings into being in The Tempest is merely the baseless fabric of a vision, and yet he can claim
graves at my command
Have wak’d their sleepers, op’d, and let ’em forth By my so potent Art.
It is just this profound ambivalence, about its power and its emptiness, that inspires Plato’s attack on painting, poetry, and the other arts, an attack which is expressed at various points in the Republic but most concentratedly in Book X.
When the future Guardians go up from the cave into the open air, they may eventually even be able to look directly at the sun. The sun, in Plato’s story, stands for the Good, and the analogy is a complex one. As the sun makes living things grow, so the existence of everything is explained by the Good; as the sun enables everything to be seen, including itself, so the Good enables everything, including itself, to be known. What this means is that explanation and understanding must reveal why it is ‘for the best’ that things should be so rather than otherwise.38 Plato’s conception of ‘the best’ must be understood in a very abstract way: he is concerned with such matters as the mathematical beauty and simplicity of the ultimate relations between things, an interest which he seems to have derived (together, probably, with his belief in immortality) from the mystical and mathematical tradition of the Pythagoreans, which he encountered on his visits to Greek communities in Italy, first in about 387 BC.
When Plato talks of things being ‘for the best’, we should not think of him as like Dr Pangloss in Voltaire’s Candide, who claims that this is the best of all possible worlds and that if we knew enough we would see that everything, however disastrous, is ultimately for the best in humanly recognizable terms such as happiness and welfare. That outlook is a shallow version of Christianity, a religion which is committed (at least after Augustine) to believing that human history and everyday human experience do matter in the ultimate scale of things. Plato, in the Republic and, notably, in the Phaedo (but by no means everywhere else), expresses something different, the aspiration to be released and distanced from finite human concerns altogether, and this is reflected in his conception of what is ‘for the best’. Dr Pangloss and his metaphysically more distinguished model, Leibniz, are regarded as optimists, 39 but even in the Utopian Republic Plato is pessimistic about everyday life, and although these Middle Period works frequently remind us of finite and fleeting happiness, particularly through friendship, the ascent from the cave into the sunlight signals a departure from human concerns altogether.
Plato offers us in the Republic another model of the relation between everyday experience and the ‘higher’ reality. We are to imagine a line, divided into two sections. The top part corresponds to knowledge, and also, therefore, to those things that we can know; the lower part corresponds to belief, and to those things about which we can have no better than belief. These two parts are each divided again into two subsections. When we consider these sub-sections the emphasis is not so much on different things about which we may have knowledge or belief, but rather on more or less direct methods40 of acquiring knowledge or belief. The lowest sub-section is said to relate to shadows and reflections, while the sub-section above relates to ordinary, three-dimensional, things. Plato can hardly think that there is a special state of mind involved simply in looking at shadows and reflections. The point is that relying on shadows and reflections is a poor or second-best way of acquiring beliefs about ordinary solid objects. The sub-sections of the upper part of the line make a similar point, one that is also expressed in the story of the cave. There is a state of mind that is a poor or second-best way of getting to know about unchanging reality. This, according to Plato, is the state of mind of mathematicians in his time.
He saw two limitations to that mathematics. One was that although it understood, of course, that its propositions were not literally true of any physical diagram—no line is quite straight, no equalities are really equal, no units are unequivocally units—nevertheless, it relied on diagrams. Moreover, it relied on unproved assumptions or axioms, and Plato takes the opportunity of describing the Guardians’ education to sketch an ultimately ambitious research programme, which will derive all mathematical assumptions from some higher or more general truths, arriving ultimately at an entirely rational and perspicuous structure which in some sense depends on the self-explanatory starting point41 of the Good. It is made quite clear that Socrates cannot explain what this will be like, not just because his hearers will not understand it but because he does not understand it himself. It involves an intellectual project and a vision that lay beyond the historical Socrates, obviously enough, but also beyond Plato when he wrote the Republic. In fact, it was a project that was never to be carried out on such a grandiose scale.
The reality that corresponds to the highest section of the line42 consists of Forms, objects which are—whatever else—eternal, immaterial, unchanging, and the objects of rational, a priori, knowledge (which, in the Republic’s scheme of things, is the only knowledge there is). Commentators discuss ‘the Theory of Forms’, but there is really no such thing (which is why there is no question to be answered of whether or when Plato gave it up). It is more helpful to see Plato as having a general conception of a Form, in the sense of some such abstract, intellectual, object; having also a set of philosophical questions; and as continually asking how such objects might contribute, in various ways, to answering those various questions. The Republic represents the boldest version of the idea that one and the same set of objects could answer all those questions. Plato did not cease to think that there were abstract objects of rational understanding, existing independently of the material world, but he came to see that one and the same kind of object could not serve in all the roles demanded of it by the Republic.
Aristotle43 says that Socrates was interested in questions of definition, but that Plato was the first to make Forms ‘separate’. In this connection, a Form can be understood as the quality or character in virtue of which many particular things are of the same kind; and to say that it is ‘separate’ marks the point that the quality would exist even if there were no particulars that possessed it, as one might say that there would be a virtue of courage even if there were no courageous people. (As we shall see, Plato also wants to say that, for more than one reason, particulars cannot properly, perfectly, or without qualification instantiate Forms.) This is the approach to Forms from the theory of meaning; in the Republic Plato seems to give an entirely general formulation of this idea when he says: ‘Shall we start the enquiry with our usual procedure? We are in the habit, I take it, of positing a single idea or Form for each case in which we give the same name to many things.’
Aristotle also says45 that Plato, ‘Having in his youth first becomefamiliar with Cratylus and the Heracleitean doctrines (that all sensible things are always in a state of flux and there is no knowledge about them), these views he held even in later years.’ In this connection, Forms are, or are very closely associated with, the objects of mathematical study. As the image of the divided line makes clear, geometers use material, particular, diagrams, but they cannot be talking directly about those diagrams, or what they say (‘the line AB is equal to the line AC’ and so on) would be simply untrue. They must be talking about something else, triangles formed of absolutely straight lines with no breadth. This is the approach from the possibility of a priori knowledge. It is in this role that Forms can also be naturally taken to be those objects of intellectual vision that the argument of the Meno needed as the archetypal source of the beliefs recovered in recollection.
The geometers’ triangles, unlike scrawled or carpentered triangles of everyday life, are perfect. This is an idea that Plato applied to some other kinds of objects as well: a Form was a paradigm. So when a craftsman makes an artefact, his aim is to approximate to the best that such a thing could be, an ideal which, it may well be, neither he nor anyone else will ever adequately express in a particular material form. So it is with a couch in Book X of the Republic and a shuttle in the Cratylus.46 The conceptions of a Form as a paradigm, and of a Form as a general quality or characteristic, come together with special force when there is a quality that we find in particular things, but which occurs in them in a way that is imperfect in the strong sense that our experience of them carries with it an aspiration, a yearning, for an ideal. The most powerful example of this, for Plato, is beauty.
The geometers’ triangles, on the one hand, and qualities or characteristics such as courage or dampness, on the other, are all uncreated and unchanging. The world changes: damp things dry out, particular people become courageous or cease to be so. But dampness and courage and such things do not themselves change, except in the boring sense that beauty changes if at one time it characterizes Alcibiades and at a later time it does not, and this is not a change in it (any more than it is a change in Socrates that young Theaetetus, who is growing, is shorter than him one year and taller the next year).47 So there is a fundamental contrast between Forms and the world in which things change, our everyday world.
Sometimes, Plato invokes Forms to explain change. This is notably so in the Phaedo, which uses conceptions that are hard to fit together with the discussions, particularly in the Republic, which emphasize the meta-physical distance between Forms and particulars. It treats Forms as though parts of them could be transitory ingredients or occupants of material things (as we speak of the dampness in the wall). It is relevant that this discussion has a very special aim, to support a curious proof of the immortality of the soul (which Plato nowhere else uses or relies on). This proof requires the indestructible Form, life, in the sense of ‘aliveness’, to join with a particular, Socrates, in such a way that there will be an item, ‘Socrates’ aliveness’, which is as indestructible as the Form but as individual as Socrates. This is Socrates’ soul; indeed, it is Socrates himself, when he is freed of the irrelevance of his body.
When Plato says that, in contrast to the Forms, particulars in the material world are ‘changing’, he means more than that they are changing in time. He also means that when we say that a material thing is round or red, for instance, what we say is only relatively or qualifiedly true: it is round or red from one point of view but not another, to one observer rather than another, by comparison with one thing and not another. So what we say about material things is only relatively or qualifiedly true. Indeed, if our statements mean what they seem to say, for instance that this surface is red without qualification, then they are not true at all—not really true. Only what we say about Forms can be absolutely or un-qualifiedly true.
This gives a broader sense in which things in the material world are imperfect compared with Forms. Only in some cases, such as beauty, does the imperfection of particular things evoke the pathos of incompleteness, of regret, indeed (given Plato’s idea of recollection) of nostalgia. But in the sense that nothing is unqualifiedly or absolutely what we say it is, but is so only for a time, to an observer, or from a point of view—in that sense, everything in the material world is imperfect. In the Republic this contrast is expressed in the strongest terms, which we have already encountered in the image of the line. Only what is in the world of Forms ‘really is’; the world of everyday perception is ‘between being and not being’, and is mere appearance or like a dream; only ‘being’ can be the object of knowledge, while the world of ‘becoming’ is the object of mere belief or conjecture.
There has been much discussion of what exactly Plato meant by these formulations. We should certainly try to make the best sense we can of them, but we should not expect an overall interpretation that is fully intelligible in our terms. To do so is to ignore a vital point, that, however exactly his thought developed, he himself certainly came to think that the Republic’s formulations would not do. There are many ways in which the later dialogues acknowledge this. Most generally, Plato came to recognize the tensions that the various approaches to the Forms, taken together, must create. The approach from the theory of meaning implies, unless it is restricted, that there should be a Form for every general term we can use, but other approaches imply that Forms, being perfect, have something particularly grand and beautiful about them. So are there Forms for general terms which stand for low and unlovely things, such as mud and hair? Again, some approaches imply that a Form itself has the quality it imparts. The Form of beauty is itself beautiful, paradigmatically so; the Phaedo’s theory of explanation seems to imply that the dampness in an object is indeed damp. The theory of meaning approach, on the other hand, and perhaps others, imply that this had better not be so, or we may be confronted with a regress: shall we need another Form to explain how the first Form has the properties that it has? All these are among the questions that are put to the embarrassed Socrates in the first part of the Parmenides.
In the Sophist, Plato explores with very great care the complex relations between five particularly abstract concepts, which he calls ‘the greatest kinds’ rather than Forms—being, sameness, difference, motion and rest—and reaches subtle conclusions about the ways in which they apply to each other and to themselves. In the course of this, he distinguishes various ways in which a thing ‘is’ something or other, and invents powerful instruments for solving the logical and semantic problems that underlie some of the central formulations of the Republic. He also recognizes there, gravely dissociating himself from the admired Parmenides, that there cannot be two worlds of appearance and reality. If something appears to be so, then it really does so appear: appearance must itself be part of reality.50 This conclusion in itself represents a direct repudiation of the detailed metaphysics of the Republic.
The Theaetetus, which offers a most powerful and subtle discussion of knowledge, develops a theory of sense perception which at least refines the Republic’s view out of all recognition, and on one reading, is opposed to it.51 In the same dialogue, and in the Sophist, Plato advances in discussion of false belief, and of being and not being, to a point at which it is clear that many things said in the Republic need revision. Moreover, he goes back in the Theaetetus to the point acknowledged in the Meno, that it must be possible for one person merely to believe what another person knows. The ideas of knowledge and belief that are articulated in the Republic and expressed in the images of the line and the cave are controlled by consideration of subject matter, of what might be or become a body of systematic a priori knowledge. The Republic is not interested, for example, in the state of mind of someone who makes a mathematical mistake (it cannot be belief, because he is thinking about the eternal, and it cannot be knowledge, because he is wrong). This would not matter if Plato were concerned only with the nature of the sciences, but, as he recognizes, we must be able to talk about knowledge and belief as states of individual people. The ascent from the cave must be a story of personal enlightenment, if the Republic is to fulfil its promise of helping us to understand how to live, and this needs a psychology of belief which can bridge the metaphysical gulf between the eternal and the changing.
PLATO’S PHILOSOPHY AND THE DENIAL OF LIFE
The sharp oppositions of the Republic between eternal reality and the illusions of the changing material world not only left deep problems of philosophical theory; they defeated Plato’s ethical purposes. The problem of how justice is to be preserved in the world was solved by the return of the Guardians to rule, unwillingly, in the cave. There is a question, touched on in the Republic, of why they should do this. Certainly, Plato thinks that it is better that the just and wise should rule unwillingly, rather than that those who actually want power should have it. But that must mean, better for the world, and Plato must acknowledge the reality of the material world to this extent, that Socrates’ fate and other injustices, and the horrors described in the degeneration of the city, are real evils, which are better prevented. Although the just city (and only the just city) suits the Guardians’ nature, even there the activity of philosophy is more satisfying than ruling. Returning to the cave is good for them only because it is a good thing to do.
But why is it a good thing to do, and why is it better ‘for the world’ that it should be ruled justly? The returning Guardians cannot abolish the cave and its apparatus, as Parsifal with the sign of the cross destroys Klingsor’s magic garden. Do they release its prisoners? (Here again we meet the ambivalence between power and mere illusion.) Most of the prisoners could not be released, for the ascent to the light is reserved for those special people in whom reason is strong and who are capable of becoming Guardians themselves. But those who are not like this will at least be saved from exploitation, and they can be helped by the laws and institutions of the city not to become unjust exploiters themselves, making others and themselves miserable. So it does matter, a great deal, what happens in this world, and the sense, which it is easy to get from the Republic, that in being required to rule, the Guardians are displaced or sentenced to it, like intellectual imperialists in a dark place, cannot really be adequate to Plato’s conception of them and of society’s need for justice.
The same tensions surface, differently, in the Gorgias. There, Socrates asserts the paradoxes that it is better to have injustice done to one than to do injustice, and that the good man ‘cannot be harmed’, because the only thing that really matters to him is his virtue and that is inviolate against the assaults of the world.52 This outlook (which was to be developed by some philosophers in later antiquity into an extreme asceticism) leaves an impossible gap between the motivations that it offers for an ethical life, and what one is supposed to do if one leads it. The motivations to justice are said to lie in the care of the soul, and, along with that, in the belief that what happens to one’s body or one’s possessions does not really matter; but, if we have that belief, why do we suppose, as justice requires us to suppose, that it matters whether other people’s bodies and possessions are assaulted or appropriated?
In the Phaedo, Plato seems to present in the strongest terms the idea that the good person is better off outside the world. We are told that Socrates’ very last words54, as the hemlock took its effect, were, ‘Crito, we owe a cockerel to Asclepius’, and since Asclepius was a god of healing, this has been taken to mean that life is a disease, a ‘terrible and ridiculous “last word” ’, as Nietzsche put it, a ‘veiled, gruesome, pious and blasphemous saying’.55 Spinoza, equally, rejected the Phaedo’s suggestion that philosophy should be a ‘meditation’ or preparation of death, urging that it should be a ‘meditation of life’. It might be said that the dialogue’s disparagement of this life as opposed to the metaphysical beyond is forgivable granted the occasion. Yet that is not right either, since the end of the Phaedo is, hardly surprisingly, run through with a deep sorrow, and we are not supposed to think that Socrates’ friends are grieving simply because they have not been convinced by the arguments for immortality. It registers, rather, that, even given immortality and the world of Forms, this world and its friendships are of real value, and that its losses are at some level as bad as they seem.
Plato’s will to transcend mortal life, to reach for the ‘higher’, is part of the traditional image of his philosophy, and is one element in the equally traditional contrast between him and the more empirically rooted Aristotle, a contrast expressed most famously, perhaps, in Raphael’s fresco in the Vatican, The School of Athens, which displays at its centre the figures of Plato and Aristotle, the one turning his hand towards heaven, the other downwards towards earth. In our own century, Yeats wrote:
Plato thought nature but a spume that plays
Upon a ghostly paradigm of things;
Solider Aristotle played the taws
Upon the bottom of a king of kings . . .
But Plato is not always drawing us beyond the concerns of this world. Even those works in which ‘the higher’ is celebrated do not always take the tone of the Phaedo’s official message, or of the Republic. In the case of the Republic, we spoke first in terms of ascent, the journey out of the cave, but in fact it is the Guardians’ return that lends its colour to the work as a whole, an impression strengthened as it goes on by the long story of social and personal decline. The world of desire, politics, and material bodies is essentially seen from above, from outside the cave, and we are left with a sense of it as denatured and unreal or as powerfully corrupting. But elsewhere, and above all in the Symposium, the picture really is of ascent, and the material world is seen with the light behind it, as it were, giving an image not of failure and dereliction but of promise.
The participants in the dinner party which the Symposium describes, talk about what eros is, what it is to be a lover. The lover and his desires have some relation to beauty, or beautiful things; in particular, beautiful young men. We learn more precisely what these desires are. His desire is not a desire for the beautiful, at least in an obvious sense:
—Love is not love of the beautiful, as you think.
—What is it, then?
—Of reproduction and birth in the beautiful.
Symposium, 206e
This desire itself turns out to be an expression, or form, of a desire to be immortal.
Now this provides a schema, to put it in rather formal terms, which can be filled out differently for different types of love. A man’s love for a woman defines ‘birth’ literally; ‘in’, ‘in association with’, is sexual; and the immortality in question is genetic. A man may bring forth or generate not babies but ideas or poems, and live for ever (or at least for longer) through those. The beauty in question may now be that of a particular youth, or something more general—as we might say, youthful beauty; again, it may be beauty of soul rather than of body. There is nothing to imply that the various abstractions, as we might call them, necessarily keep step with one another. Socrates has been disposed to generate ideas and good thoughts but in association with youths who had beautiful bodies. Conversely, Alcibiades, we learn later, 57 is drawn to Socrates’ beautiful soul, but he has little idea of what an appropriate birth would be.
Then Diotima gives her account of the end of the progress, to the ‘final and highest mysteries of love’, which she doubts that Socrates can achieve. Here, in a famous passage, the lover is said to turn to the great sea of beauty, and will come to see something ‘wonderfully beautiful in its nature’, which
always is and neither comes to be nor passes away, neither waxes nor wanes; it is not beautiful in one way and ugly in another, nor beautiful at one time and not at another, nor beautiful in relation to one thing and ugly in relation to another, nor beautiful in one place and ugly in another, as it would be if it were beautiful to some people and ugly to others . . .
Symposium, 210e–211a
and it is not embodied in any face or body, or idea, or knowledge, or, indeed, in anything at all. This culminating, ultimately fulfilling, encounter still fits the original schema. This would indeed be a worth-while life for a man; he would bring forth, not images of virtue, but true virtue, and his relation to the Form of beauty, which is what has just been described, would be that of seeing it and being with it, words reminiscent of the language originally applied to sexual relations with a beautiful person.
Diotima’s account of this progress or ascent does not imply, as some have thought, that no one ever really loves a particular person, but only the beauty in that person, or beauty itself. On the contrary, one can love a particular person in any of the various ways that count as bringing something to birth in the presence of that person’s beauty. The account directly denies, in fact, that all love is love of beauty. Moreover, it does not suggest that the particulars, sights and sounds and bodies, were only seemingly or illusorily beautiful. They are not unconditionally, or un-qualifiedly, or absolutely, beautiful, which is what the item of the final vision is. Indeed, Diotima can say that from the vantage point of the vision, colours and human bodies and other such things are merely ‘mortal nonsense’, but that is only by comparison with the vision, and it does not imply that the mortals who thought that those things were beautiful were simply mistaken, or that they were mistaken to have pursued them. The undertaking she teaches is something like a growth in aesthetic taste, from kitschy music, say, to more interesting music. It does not deny the point or the object of the earlier taste, and indeed the earlier taste is a condition of the process, which is a progress rather than the mere detection of error or the elimination of a misunderstanding.
Diotima says that the earlier pursuits were ‘for the sake of’ the final secrets. This does not mean that unless the ultimate state is reached the earlier states are pointless. It means that from the latter perspective we can see a point to them which they do not reveal at all to some people, and reveal only imperfectly even to those who are going about them in the right way. For those who do go about them in the right way, that imperfection is expressed in an obscure unsatisfactoriness or incompleteness in those earlier relationships, which can be traced to their failure to express adequately the desire to be immortal, to have the Good for ever. How far such a feeling may come even to those who are not going about the erotic in the right way and could never reach the vision, is something about which the earlier speeches have things to say.
All of this, certainly, expresses a discontent with the finite, and a sense of a greater splendour that lies beyond our ordinary passions, but it does so in a way that, far more than the Republic or the rather dismal Phaedo, allows those passions to have their own life and to promise more. This effect is achieved in the dialogue by the later intervention of Alcibiades, and by the earlier speeches, which are variously funny and idiosyncratic and one of which, that of Aristophanes, tells a suitably absurd and touching story about the origins of sexual attraction. The sense that the Symposium knows what it is talking about in its dealings with desire—in this respect it is like some other less sunny dialogues—lends colour to another comment of Nietzsche’s: ‘All philosophical idealism to date was something like a disease, unless it was, as in Plato’s case, the caution of an over-rich and dangerous health, the fear of over-powerful senses . . .’
Plato set higher than almost any other thinker the aspirations of philosophy, and, as we have seen, its hopes to change one’s life through theory. Granted the distrust and even the rejection of the empirical world which do play a significant role in his outlook; granted, too, the fact that his politics are far removed from any that could serve us now, not only in time but by an unashamedly aristocratic temperament; we may ask how his dialogues can remain so vividly alive. They are, indeed, sometimes sententious, and Socrates speaking on behalf of virtue can be tiring and high-minded, just as his affectation of ignorance and simplicity, the famous ‘irony’, can be irritatingly coy. But their faults are almost always those of a real person. They speak with a recognizable human voice, or more than one, and they do not fall into the stilted, remote complacency or quaint formalism to which moral philosophy is so liable. In part this is because of the dialogue form. In part, it is because (as Nietzsche’s remark implies) Plato is constantly aware of the forces—of desire, of aesthetic seduction, of political exploitation—against which his ideals are a reaction. The dialogues preserve a sense of urgency and of the social and psychological insecurity of the ethical. Plato never forgets that the human mind is a very hostile environment for goodness, and he takes it for granted that some new device, some idea or imaginative stroke, may be needed to keep it alive there and to give it a hold on us. A treatise which supposedly offered in reader-friendly form the truth about goodness could not do anything that really needed doing.
The dialogues are never closed or final. They do not offer the ultimate results of Plato’s great enquiry. They contain stories, descriptions, jokes, arguments, harangues, streams of free intellectual invention, powerful and sometimes violent rhetoric, and much else. Nothing in them straight-forwardly reports those theoretical findings on which everything was supposed to turn, and they never take the tone that now you have mastered this, your life will be changed. There are theoretical discussions, often very complex, subtle, and original. There are many statements of how our lives need to be changed and of how philosophy may help to change them. But the action is always somewhere else, in a place where we, and typically Socrates himself, have not been. The results are never in the text before us. They could not be. The passage from the Phaedrus from which we started was true to Plato’s outlook, as it seems to me, in claiming that what most importantly might come from philosophy cannot be written down.
This does not mean that it could be written down, but somewhere else. Nor does it mean, I think, that it could not be written down but could be spoken as a secret lore among initiates. The Pythagoreans in Italy from whom Plato may have got some initial inspiration seem to have had esoteric doctrines, and some scholars have thought that the same was true of Plato’s Academy, but there is not much reason to believe it. The limitations of writing do not apply only to writing. Rather, Plato seems to have thought that the final significance of philosophy for one’s life does not lie in anything that could be embodied in its findings, but emerges, rather, from its activities. One will find one’s life changed through doing something other than researching the changes that one’s life needs—through mathematics, Plato thought, or through dialectical discussion of such things as the metaphysical problems of not being, conducted not with the aim of reaching edifying moral conclusions, but the aim of getting it right (particularly if one has got it wrong before, and intellectual honesty, or—come to that—a most powerful curiosity, demands that one try again).
Plato did think that if you devoted yourself to theory, this could change your life. He did think, at least at one period, that pure studies might lead one to a transforming vision. But he never thought that the materials or conditions of such a transformation could be set down in a theory, or that a theory would, at some suitably advanced level, explain the vital thing you needed to know. So the dialogues do not present us with a statement of what might be most significantly drawn from philosophy, but that is not a peculiarity of them or of us; nothing could present us with that, because it cannot be stated anywhere, but can only, with luck and in favourable surroundings, emerge. Plato probably did think himself that the most favourable surroundings would be a group of people entirely dedicated to philosophy, but clearly he supposed that reading the dialogues, thinking about them, entering into them, were activities that could offer something to people outside such a group. He acknowledged, as Socrates makes clear in the Phaedrus, that they could not be the vehicles of one determinate message, and it is just because they are not intended to control the minds of his readers, but to open them, that they go on having so much to offer.
It is pointless to ask who is the world’s greatest philosopher: for one thing, there are many different ways of doing philosophy. But we can say what the various qualities of great philosophers are: intellectual power and depth; a grasp of the sciences; a sense of the political, and of human destructiveness as well as creativity; a broad range and a fertile imagination; an unwillingness to settle for the superficially reassuring; and, in an unusually lucky case, the gifts of a great writer. If we ask which philosopher has, more than any other, combined all these qualities—to that question there is certainly an answer, Plato.
THE DIALOGUES
A quick reference list of Plato’s dialogues that are mentioned in this book.
E(arly), M(iddle), L(ate): represent datings. In most cases there is a fairconsensus, but some remain controversial.
Apology [E] a speech that Socrates might have given at his trial.
Cratylus [?M] on language, critically discussing certain theories of names.
Gorgias [E/M] on rhetoric and the good life; Socrates argues successively with Gorgias, Polus and Callicles.
Laches [E] on courage.
Laws [L] probably Plato’s last work; in twelve books, on desirable political and social arrangements. Socrates does not appear, and the main speaker is ‘an Athenian’.
Meno [E/M] whether virtue can be taught; Socrates invokes ‘recollection’ and immortality.
Parmenides [?L] Parmenides first raises problems about Forms, and then gives a demonstration of dialectic.
Phaedo [M] the scene of Socrates’ death; they discuss immortality.
Phaedrus [M] during a walk in the country, Phaedrus and Socrates have a conversation about love, beauty, poetry, philosophy and writing.
Philebus [L] on pleasure, but with an opening discussion of ‘limit’ and the ‘unlimited’.
Protagoras [E] brilliant exchanges between Socrates and Protagoras, on virtue, knowledge and politics.
Republic [M] in ten books, on justice in the individual and in the city, and many other matters.
Socratic dialogues [E] dialogues in which the discussion does not go beyond the interests and methods of the historical Socrates. Besides the Laches, among those of particular interest are the Euthyphro, which discusses the relations of ethics to the gods, and the Crito, in which Socrates argues that he must stay and face the death penalty.
Sophist [L] complex and sophisticated argument in metaphysics and the philosophy of language. Socrates is present, but the argument is entirely conducted by an ‘Eleatic stranger’.
Statesman (Politicus) [L] also conducted by the Eleatic stranger, the discussion develops a classificatory form of dialectic by ‘division’, which also appears in the Sophist.
Symposium [M] a dinner party, at which the guests entertain themselves with a series of speeches about love.
Theaetetus [L] exceptionally powerful and concentrated philosophical enquiry, in which three accounts of knowledge are considered and rejected; the first, in terms of perception, is the most developed.
Timaeus [?L] elaborate, if tentative, speculations about the creation of the world. Socrates is present but five-sixths of the work consists of uninterrupted exposition by Timaeus.
NOTES
The standard system of reference to Plato’s works is by ‘Stephanus’ page numbers, which denote the page and column number of a given passage in the edition of Plato published in 1578 by Henri Estienne.
The translations of the quoted passages are by myself, but they are based on the translations, by various authors, in Plato: Complete Works, ed. J. M. Cooper (Hackett, Indianapolis, 1997).
For help in preparing the notes and bibliography, I am grateful to Casey Perrin.
1. The ancient sources are not consistent in their dating of Plato’s life. Most modern accounts date his birth some time between 429 and 427 BC. For details see Kraut (1992), p. 30 n. 1 and Guthrie (1975), p. 10.
2. A. N. Whitehead, Process and Reality: An Essay in Cosmology, corrected edn, ed. D. R. Griffin and D. W. Sherburne (Free Press, New York, 1978), p. 39.As Kraut (1992), p. 32 n. 4 says, perhaps rather unnecessarily, Whitehead’s remark should not be taken to imply that philosophers after Plato all accepted his views as their starting point.
3. As, it should be said, many still do.
4. Thirteen Letters are among a set of works attributed to Plato in antiquity by Diogenes Laertius (3.50, cf. 3.57–62) and included in the medieval manuscripts, but whose authenticity is a matter of long and still unsettled controversy among scholars. For references see Guthrie (1975), pp. 399–401. One other work that is not strictly speaking a dialogue is the Apology, which is a speech that Socrates might appropriately have made at his trial.
5. But he mentions himself three times (excluding the Letters). In the Apology (34b, 38b) he twice says that he himself was present at the trial of Socrates, and in the second passage he is said to be among those who offered to pay a fine on behalf of Socrates should the court accept that as a penalty. At Phaedo 59b the narrator of the dialogue reports that Plato himself was not present on the last day of Socrates’ life, because he was ill.
6. On the historical Socrates see Vlastos (1991) and Gottlieb (1997). There is a harder question about the dialogues as evidence of what Socrates believed (the so-called ‘Socratic question’): see below pp. 152, 153–56, 170.
7. We can learn a lot from the Theaetetus, but the second, and still more the third, sections of it are clearly designed to provide material for further discussion. This is brought out in Burnyeat (1990).
8. A good example is the final argument of the Protagoras: see below pp. 156–57.
9. Whatever the status of the works ascribed to Aristotle (who was forty-three years younger than Plato, was his pupil and broke away from him) they are a lot nearer to the treatise in form, and display a very different temperament.
10. The school lasted, with an unbroken line of successors, till the first century BC; the prevailing philosophy changed a lot, and was by no means always Platonic.
11. For discussion of this dialogue, see Ferrari (1987), and of this passage, chapter 7.
12. For a concise discussion of the methods and results of stylometric studies, see Brandwood (1992). Aristotle tells us (Politics 1264b26–7) that the Laws was written after the Republic; it is universally agreed to be late. In the case of some dialogues, there is evidence for their actual date of composition or their chronology relative to other dialogues. Several dialogues contain allusions to historical events which allow us to fix a date after which they must have been written. The Symposium, for example, alludes to the King’s Peace of 386 BC (182b) and the Spartan division of Arcadia in 385 (193a). The Theaetetus begins with a conversation that takes place very shortly before the death of Theaetetus after a battle in Corinth in 369 BC (142a–b). The Statesman is taken to have been composed after the Sophist since it refers back to the Sophist on several occasions (257a, 258b, 266d, 284b, 286b). In what follows I use ‘dating’ loosely, to cover placing the dialogues in an order relative to one another.
13. The Republic is in 10 books, and some scholars take Book I to be significantly earlier than the other books. See Vlastos (1991) p. 248–51 for discussion.
14. Some scholars place the Theaetetus in Plato’s Middle Period, but it must surely be associated closely with the Sophist. The Statesman is often known by its Latin name, Politicus.
15. See Theaetetus, 183e–184a, and various passages in the Sophist (e.g. 237a, 241b), where his central doctrine is rejected. The poem of Parmenides (c.515–c.450 BC) survives only in fragments. A translation of these, with commentary, can be found in McKirahan (1994).
16. Zeno of Elea (born c.490 BC), who invented famous paradoxes, including that of Achilles and the Tortoise, which supposedly show that the idea of movement is self-contradictory. For discussion, see Kirk, Raven and Schofield (1983).
17. It is worth saying that there is no hope of making adequate sense of the first part of the Parmenides, which is crucial to these debates, unless we can get a better grasp on the second part than most people claim to have.
18. Here, as on several other points, I am indebted to Myles Burnyeat.
19. One of the characters in the Laches is Melesias, the son of Thucydides—not the historian, but an Athenian politician who opposed Pericles and was banished from Athens for ten years some time around 440 BC. He is mentioned in the Meno (94b–e) (along with Themistocles, Aristides, and Pericles) as an example of a father who failed to teach his son (the Melesias of the Laches) virtue.
20. Ancient democracy was both more and less ‘democratic’ than modern systems: more, because all citizens could take part in political decisions; less, because there were no minority rights, it was based on slavery, and women were excluded.
21. See Gorgias, 515d–516d. Pericles (c.495–c.429 BC) was an Athenian statesman and the main influence on Athenian policy in the middle years of the fifth century. The noblest expression of Athenian democratic ideals is to be found in the Funeral Speech ascribed to Pericles in Thucydides’ History (II.34–46). To call him an unprincipled demagogue was rather like comparing Abraham Lincoln to Senator McCarthy.
22. There were of course predecessors. The fragment of Parmenides’ poem (see note 15 above) is an interesting case; the emphatic inferential structure, together with the determined charmlessness of the verse, seems designed to make the point.
23. The same technique is used in the Cratylus; in that case, it is shown that the method of etymology can be used with equal plausibility to produce contrary results.
24. Meno, 75b.
25. Pindar, fragment 133.
26. Meno, 86a: he knows this when he is a man and when he is not a man; he is always either a man or not a man; so he knows it always.
27. Meno, 97a. In a world without maps, personal experience may well be the best basis of such beliefs. There is a similar but more complex example, of a jury acquiring from a specious orator what is in fact a true belief about something they did not witness, in the Theaetetus (200d–201c).
28. Erotic relations between older and younger men were a standard feature of Athenian life, and carried strong educational and other values. See Dover (1989) for discussion. Details of Alcibiades’ life (c.450–404 BC) are to be found in Thucydides’ History, books V–VIII, and Xenophon’s Hellenica, book I.
29. Symposium, 210a.
30. Gorgias, 474c–481b.
31. Gorgias, 491a–495a.
32. Republic, 352d.
33. Republic, 343c. The formulation ‘justice is the interest of the stronger’, Republic, 338c.
34. Republic, 358b–c; 367b.
35. In Republic IV, 435b–444e.
36. For Plato’s discussion of the inclusion of women in the education of the Guardians, see Republic, 451c–457c.
37. The Tempest V, 1, 48–50. For the application of this to art, see Stephen Greenblatt, Marvelous Possessions (Oxford University Press, Oxford, 1991).
38. The same point is made, contrasting such explanations with others, in the Phaedo (96c–98b).
39. Pangloss is usually said to expound a ‘vulgarized’ version of Leibniz’s philosophy, but Leibniz himself, like some other mathematical and metaphysical geniuses, but unlike Plato, was capable of being ethically very crass.
40. Republic, 509d–511e. The relations between the sun, the line, and the cave have traditionally given rise to great controversy between interpreters.
41. Republic, 510b–511e. Plato’s own phrase means a starting point which is not a hypothesis itself and does not depend on a hypothesis.
42. Certainly with regard to the top sub-section. It is controversial whether there are ‘mathematical objects’, distinct from Forms, corresponding to the sub-section below this.
43. Metaphysics, 987b1–13.
44. 596a. But the Greek could mean: where there is a Form, the Form and the particulars have the same name.
45. Metaphysics, 987a32–b1.
46. Republic, 596a–b, Cratylus, 389a–b. In the Cratylus passage there is nothing to imply that the Form is ‘separate’.
47. Theaetetus, 155b–c.
48. Phaedo, 105b–107a. When Socrates’ companion Crito asks how his friends should bury him, Socrates replies: ‘In any way you like, if you can catch me and I do not escape from you’ (Phaedo, 115c).
49. For the question whether there are Forms of mud and hair, see Par-menides, 130c–d; for the ‘Third Man’ argument, one version of the regress, 131e–132b.
50. Sophist, 249c–d. A related point is made in the Philebus (54c), where it is recognized that there can be ‘a becoming into being’.
51. For a detailed discussion of two competing interpretations of the first part of the Theaetetus, see Burnyeat (1990), pp. 7–64, especially pp. 7–10.
52. Gorgias, 507 seq.
53. There is a complex Christian inheritance of this problem. It has included some heretical strains, related to Manicheanism, which took seriously the idea that it did not matter at all what happened in this life; and also the temptation, inherited by some Kantians, to suppose that what really counts as harming people is to make them less moral.
54. Phaedo, 118a. This interpretation, rare in antiquity, became popular in the Renaissance, and again in the nineteenth century.
55. The Gay Science, 340. Some of his other remarks about Plato are less interesting, such as The Twilight of the Idols, ‘What I Owe to the Ancients’, sec. 2, ‘Plato was a coward in the face of reality.’
56. ‘Among School Children’; the reference is to the fact that Aristotle was the tutor of Alexander the Great. The contrast between Plato and Aristotle has had a complex history, and has by no means always meant the same thing; in the seventeenth century, for instance, one thing Plato stood for was the spirit of the new mathematical science. I have said something about this in an article about Greek philosophy in Finley (1981) [= chap. 1 above—Ed.].
57. Symposium, 215–217.
58. The Gay Science, 372.
* As a help in identifying the various dialogues mentioned in this book, there is a list of them, with brief descriptions, at p. 180.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. General Works
For a recent collection of essays on a wide range of topics in Plato see:Kraut, Richard, ed., The Cambridge Companion to Plato (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1992)
Perhaps the best single volume treatment of Plato’s work, and one that is particularly sensitive to the literary aspects of Plato’s writing, is:
Grube, G.M.A., Plato’s Thought, with new introduction, bibliographic essay, and bibliography by Donald J. Zeyl (Hackett, Indianapolis, 1980)
Useful for historical material, summaries of scholarly debates about dating, and discussions of textual questions, though containing very little philosophy, is:
Guthrie, W.K.C., A History of Greek Philosophy, Vol. 4 (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1975)
The starting points for any discussion of the Socratic dialogues are:
Vlastos, Gregory, Socrates, Ironist and Moral Philosopher (Cornell University Press, Ithaca, 1991)
———. Socratic Studies, ed. Myles Burnyeat (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1994)
An edition of the Greek text of the Gorgias, the introduction and commentary to which has much of value to offer to the reader without Greek, is:
Dodds, E. R., Plato: Gorgias, A Revised Text with Introduction and Commentary (Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1959)
For a translation with philosophical commentary of the Phaedo, see:
Gallop, David, Plato: Phaedo, translated with notes (Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1975)
The best short discussions of the Symposium are the introductions to:
Nehamas, Alexander and Woodruff, Paul, Plato: Symposium, translated with introduction and notes (Hackett, Indianapolis, 1989), pp. xi–xxvi
Dover, Kenneth, Plato: Symposium, Cambridge Greek and Latin Classics (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1980), pp. 1–
The most philosophically stimulating introduction to the Republic remains:
Annas, Julia, An Introduction to Plato’s Republic (Oxford University Press, Oxford, 1981)
Further discussion of a variety of topics in the Republic, including the sun, the line, and the cave, can be found in:
Cross, R. C. and Woozley, A. D., Plato’s Republic: A Philosophical Commentary (St Martin’s Press, New York, 1964)
Reeve, C.D.C., Philosopher-Kings: The Argument of Plato’s Republic (Princeton University Press, Princeton, 1988)
An idiosyncratic but closely argued account is:
Irwin, Terence, Plato’s Ethics (Oxford University Press, Oxford, 1995)
On the Phaedrus, see the imaginative study by:
Ferrari, G.R.F., Listening to the Cicadas: a Study of Plato’s “Phaedrus” (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1987)
A recent and important book-length study of the Parmenides is:
Meinwald, Constance, Plato’s “Parmenides” (Oxford University Press, New York, 1991)
An excellent translation of the Theaetetus with a book-length, philosophically compelling introduction is:
Burnyeat, Myles, The “Theaetetus” of Plato, with a translation by M. J. Levett, revised by Myles Burnyeat (Hackett, Indianapolis and Cambridge, 1990)
2. Other Works Cited in the Notes
Brandwood, Leonard, ‘Stylometry and chronology’, in Kraut (1992) pp. 90–120 Dover, K. J., Greek Homosexuality, updated with a new postscript (Harvard University Press, Cambridge, Mass., 1989)
Finley, M. I., ed., The Legacy of Greece: a New Appraisal (Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1981)
Gottlieb, Anthony, Socrates (Phoenix/Orion, London, 1997)
Kirk, G. S., Raven, J. E., and Schofield M., The Presocratic Philosophers, second edition (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1983)
Kraut, Richard, ‘Introduction to the Study of Plato’, in Kraut (1992) pp. 1–
McKirahan, Richard D., Jr., Philosophy before Socrates (Hackett, Indianapolis, 1994)
ARISTOTLE
ELEVEN
Acting as the Virtuous Person Acts
This paper is not mainly directed to questions about moral realism in Aristotle, but it does end with a suggestion about that subject. It starts from a question that Aristotle raises about virtuous action, and gives what I think should have been Aristotle’s answer to it, an answer which I think was also, broadly speaking, Aristotle’s own answer. At the end I ask where (if anywhere) this leaves questions of moral realism in relation to such a theory.
In Nicomachean Ethics II.4 Aristotle raises the question of how it can be true, as he claims it to be, that someone becomes (e.g.) just by doing just things: for how can someone do virtuous things without already having the appropriate virtue? His answer is that the things done by the learner, although they are in a sense virtuous things, do not yet fully display the virtue. We may say that they are minimally virtuous things: they are not done as the virtuous person does them. He holds, in effect,
(A) A (fully) V act is what a V person would do, but only if it is done as the V person does such a thing.
The conditions on an act’s being done as the virtuous agent would do it are these:
(i) The agent knows (eidôs).
(ii) He does it proairoumenos kai proairoumenos di’ auto: choosing and choosing for its own sake.
(iii) He is in a steady, unchangeable state.
There is a question about how much (i) imports. There are conditions of intention here that are uncontroversially relevant. In many cases, however, their relevance is to an earlier question: not whether the V act was done as a V person would do it, but whether an even minimally V act was done at all. This is what is at issue if someone tackles the armed robber believing him not to be armed, or, differently, attempts a malicious act which misfires, doing the intended victim a good turn. These matters of intention are importantly different from questions of motive. Someone who sends a cheque to the hospital to advance his reputation is not like someone who puts the cheque into the wrong envelope: he intends, with regard to the outcome, what the generous person intends—he is, after all, seeking a reputation for generosity. He certainly does not act as the generous person would act, but his failure to do so falls under condition (ii), to which we shall come later, and not under condition (i).
It may seem puzzling that Aristotle says (NE 1105b1f.) that knowledge counts for everything in relation to technai (arts) and for little or nothing in the case of the virtues. Surely both virtue and techn; if there were not, Aristotle could not make the comparison on these terms. The proper possession of a technê can be picked out by saying that the person in general, habitually, knows what he is doing when he chooses to exercise the technê1; a person who gets it right occasionally does know, on those occasions, what he is doing, but on other occasions does not. In the case of the virtues, it is necessary to being a V person (and, indeed, we have already seen, even to doing a minimally V action) that one knows what one is doing, in that same sense, but the state of being a V person is not picked out by saying that he is standardly or regularly in that state of knowledge.
This is fairly straightforward, and it makes sense of Aristotle’s contrast. However, it has a significant consequence. Just given condition (i), one might take it to refer to some kind of moral knowledge, the presence of which distinguishes the truly V person from those who do occasional V acts, or, again, acts that are less than fully V. If you are looking at that contrast, and are disposed to express virtue in terms of knowledge, this interpretation will be attractive. But in terms of Aristotle’s contrast with the craftsman, it is not inviting at all. If moral knowledge is the virtuous person’s special possession, then that knowledge will make all the difference, and not, as Aristotle says, little or none. The knowledge mentioned in condition (i) is everyday knowledge relevant to effective intentions, as it is with technai.
I shall not say much about condition (iii). It is important that it can be taken to include, as well as generality over time, a requirement, in the style of Hume, of (appropriate) generality over people. The generous act must not be merely a whim; in addition, the agent’s generosity will not count as the virtue if he is only generous to Lulubelle. The demand that the V person should be in the appropriate state ametakinêtos (unchangeably) also covers, as Sarah Broadie has well pointed out, 2 two considerations that distinguish a virtue from a technê: that one cannot choose to exercise it or not, and (a less familiar thought, perhaps) that it counts against one’s having virtues that one can be distracted by passion from exercising them, whereas this is not so with the technai: a carpenter who makes a bad job of it because of rage or sexual distraction is not shown by this to be a bad carpenter.
There are several complexities in this area that are connected with the unity of the virtues. My clumsy formulation “it counts against having virtues” was designed to contain, without developing, the point that, if one does not accept Aristotle’s view about unity, it may make a difference what distraction is in question: if a man is distracted from brave deeds by lust rather than fear, he is not shown to lack courage. Further, there will be some skills (notably, some political ones) that require some virtues, above all the executive virtues of courage and self-control: I shall briefly come back to these later.
The question I want principally to discuss arises from condition (ii), specifically from the requirement that the V person chooses V things “for their own sake.” My concern is with this phrase, and I shall not discuss the condition more generally (e.g. the question of how the two conjuncts are related). As Broadie says in her very helpful discussion of Aristotle’s definition of virtue, 3 a virtuous disposition is expressed in choice (but not only so expressed), and this is not simply a matter of deliberation. The virtue is expressed in “reason-structured responses”, such as the emotions, which link rational and non-rational aspects of the agent.
The first question is whether (ii) entails
(B) A V person chooses V acts qua V acts.
(A) and (B) together seem to make the ideas of a V act and a V person depend on each other. There is no problem just in this, but there will be a problem if it leads to vacuity. This will be so, if we cannot distinguish one virtue from another, and/or the V agent is left with no determinate content to his thoughts. Both of these threaten if (B) and no more is adopted.
But (B) is in general false, in a de dicto sense: courageous people rarely choose acts as courageous, and modest people never choose modest behaviour as modest. Justice is about the only case in which it clearly holds. So what might be put in place of (B)? Various alternatives might be suggested.
(a) Might the acts be chosen qua kala (qua fine or noble)? Aristotle repeatedly says that virtuous people act for the sake of to kalon (the fine or the noble), and stresses that this is something common to all the virtues.4 Moreover, the presence of this idea to the mind of a virtuous agent would be less objectionable to Aristotle than it is to post-Christian thinkers. But this proposal does not tell us what it is to do a particular sort of V thing for its own sake. It leaves us with the problem of distinguishing the virtues, even to the extent that Aristotle needs to distinguish them. (Both Socrates and Aristotle, despite their views on the unity of the virtues, need to secure the minimal result that the names of the virtues have different senses, which they must have even if they have the same reference (as Socrates held), or (as Aristotle held) they pick out different dispositions, but those dispositions all imply and are implied by one and the same virtue, phronêsis (practical wisdom)).
On the present proposal, the distinctness of the virtues will be under-represented in the agent’s thought, as in (B), interpreted de dicto, it is too directly represented.
(b) I lay aside the suggestion that the V person’s fully V act can be picked out as having been done as a result of what Broadie calls “Grand End” proairesis. This again would not help with the distinction of the virtues; and I accept Broadie’s view that, so far as we can, we should disembarrass Aristotle of the Grand End view. In any case, even the greatest enthusiast for the Grand End View will surely not say that each fully V act is the product of a Grand End deliberation.
(c) The fully V act of the V person is an expression of phronêsis: it is done ek tou orthou logou (for the right reason). I take it that this (as opposed to the Grand End interpretation of it) is true, but there is a difficulty in supposing that it could answer this problem. First, phronêsis will add something to the account only if it takes us beyond the mere expression of a V disposition in a V act. Let us assume that it does so by adding the idea that the V act is the result of deliberation, actual or (let us say) appropriately understood as in the offing. Then that deliberation will offer the answer that this is the thing to do; this thing will be the V thing, and the conclusion being that of a V person, this conclusion will be appropriately related to the deliberation and to the person. But how? This is just a version of the question we are already trying to answer. Adding the fact that the V person has deliberated well (or can be seen as having deliberated well, or that there is a good deliberation in the offing) does not seem to help in answering it: it merely provides a new focus for it. What we need seems to be something, at least in central cases, about the content of the V person’s deliberation (but not the content offered by (B)).
(d) The right answer starts from the idea that di’ auto should be read negatively: the agent does the V thing not for the wrong reasons. This is correct, but it needs positive reinforcement, in the form of an account of the kinds of reasons that appropriately go with various Vs. When developed in this direction, this can indeed lead us back to the original formulation (B). (B) is very roughly right, but only if “qua V” is read de re. We say that the agent did the generous (e.g.) thing because it was the generous thing to do, and we understand what this means because we understand what it is about the situation and the action that makes this action in this situation something that would seem to a generous person the appropriate thing to do. It will follow from this that the philosophical understanding of the various virtues will require some, at least, of the understanding that comes from having the virtues: which is of course what Aristotle holds.
This does imply that there is a way in which the action seems to the agent the appropriate thing to do: a way in which such an action commends itself in such a situation to a generous person. What this means is that typically there is a kind of reason or consideration present to the agent’s thought that goes with the act’s being of this particular V kind. One important sort of consideration involved is that which serves to dismiss alternative courses of action as variously unworthy: thus, a modest person might dismiss a course of action as vainglorious. A person with a particular V disposition will have a specific repertoire of considerations that operate for or against courses of action. He may include both kinds, positive and negative, under the label “acting for X reasons.”
The V agent, then, does the V act because he thinks it is the thing to do for X reasons, where “for X reasons” is part of his thought, and the type X is tied (both positively and negatively) to the V in question. (As we have already seen in considering (B), X is only rarely the same notion as V, as it occurs in “V act”: justice is the leading case in which it is.) The role of the distinctive types of reason helps to answer the question about the separation of the virtues.
We can now have non-vacuous mutual dependence:
—A V act is an act done for X reasons.
—A V person is disposed to do V acts.
This does not simply make acts primary, because “an act done for reasons” is not a type of act independent of its agent’s state; it is an act done by an agent with a certain disposition. The account locates an important role of desire focused on to kalon, in explaining the “because” of “he did it because it was the V thing.” The business of concentrating on the X reasons, allowing them to have force, can be assisted by thoughts of how it would be shameful not to. There is no reason for Aristotle to deny this, even though he seems to think that the word “aidôs”(“shame”) relates only to a motivation of the immature (NE 1128b15f.).
There is a vital role, too, for phronêsis: without it, one could not reliably see what acts X reasons could lead to, or what more specific considerations might fall into the class of X reasons. We shall have to ask how much, if anything, that might imply in the direction of moral idealism. Before turning to this, however, we have to register that there are some of Aristotle’s virtues for which this account does not work. These are the so-called “executive” virtues of courage and sôphrosunê (temperance). I shall discuss the latter in terms of “self-control”, which is not Aristotelianly correct: “self-control” is enkrateia, a virtue that, for Aristotle, a really virtuous person does not need, and hence not strictly speaking a virtue. This, like some other views associated with the mean, seems just to represent a substantive and tedious Aristotelian ideal, which we can ignore.
The problem with courage and self-control is not just that courageous and self-controlled people do not choose acts as courageous or self-controlled; as we have seen, that is standard. The self-controlled person may reject actions as shameful, unsuitable, exploitative, etc., but his self-control is manifested not so much in that recognition—although it is partly manifested in the fact that he can achieve that recognition—as in the fact that he can carry that recognition through into action. The courageous person may (although he does not have to) reject acts as cowardly, and he may possibly do acts as kalon—Aristotle was happier to accept this than we are, having a more self-conscious idea of nobility.
The real problem is that there is no X such that courageous or self-controlled people choose their acts for X reasons. Rather, for various other V-related X reasons, they choose acts for those reasons in the face of fear or desire: the structure of the situation is that they do those things for those reasons, although . . . We shall say that those other reasons are V-related, of course, to the extent that we sympathize with Aristotle’s unity of the virtues. We could, and I believe reasonably should, say that people can display courage or self-control in doing things for reasons not related to some other virtue; but that does not matter much for the present question. The point is that even if we put in the V-related restriction on what counts as a reason for doing some courageous or self-controlled thing, courage and self-control still do not fit the account. This is because they will not fit Aristotle’s tripartite structure, which the account is explicating: no version of (ii) applies to them.6 Courageous or self-controlled things are not done “for their own sake”, and doing them for their own sake would be something quite special: something like doing a certain thing in a certain situation to display or develop one’s courage or self-control.
If the account of virtuous action looks like this, where, if anywhere, does that leave questions of moral realism? The answer must lie in the relations of all this to phronêsis, a topic that has been briefly touched on before. Aristotle uses that language of knowledge and of a kind of perception in relation to phronêsis. Is there an element in the phronêsis/ deliberation structure that could invite a kind of picture that might be labelled “moral realism” (MR)?
Might it come in, first, in explaining what the phronimos comes to know when he comes to see what to do? Surely not, since Aristotle gives us no reason to say that the conclusion of practical reasoning is in itself different when the virtues are being expressed from what it is when it is a matter of the crafts. On the contrary, the idea of a distinctive content that is introduced at this point, just when the virtues are involved in practical reasoning, is alien to Aristotle’s approach, which is essentially to incorporate the account of ethics into the theory of rational action in general.
There is, of course, a tradition according to which there is in Aristotle no distinctive conclusion of practical reasoning at all: there is only the actual doing of the action. I do not want to discuss this unappealing account here: in any case, if this were correct, the suggestion I am presently considering for where we might find a place for MR would fall away altogether.
We might add, further, that conclusions about what to do can also be reached by non-moral or anti-moral agents who are presumably not in touch with any such supposed subject matter. Aristotle does not say much about the deliberative activities of such people. A description of the akolastos (self-indulgent), that he thinks it always appropriate to pursue the present pleasure, does not eliminate such activities: on the contrary, Aristotle says of this character, as opposed to the akratês (incontinent), that he agetai proairoumenos (is led on in accordance with his own choice), and this must imply that he arrives at deliberative conclusions.
All this shows is that MR is not going to show up by considering the outcome of the phronimos’ deliberations. Now Aristotle says that phronêsis is related to cleverness (deinotês), but he holds that phronêsis is not identical to this, although it cannot exist without it (NE 1144a29). Phronêsis is essentially connected to virtue of character: and it is important that this is not a verbal point (“treason never prospers”). The thought of the phronimos is structurally and materially peculiar; and this is because he thinks of “ends”—we might say, more generally, considerations—that do not occur to other people. As Broadie points out, this capacity is part of his intelligence. He sees that certain considerations apply, are relevant, carry more weight than others. These include examples of the reasons X that are tied to the various virtues.
To some extent, one can distinguish between seeing that a statement is correct, and seeing that it is relevant to the practical situation at hand. Some of the reasons X will be simply “factual” statements (“it will embarrass her”) which might be seen to be true by someone not disposed to count them as reasons in a V-linked way. But it is easy to move out of this area (consider “she needs help”), and many of the most significant reasons X—notably among the negative considerations mentioned before—will be “thick” ethical concepts (“inconsiderate”, “disloyal”, “shabby”), where the questions of truth and of relevance can be separated only in relation to particular cases. At a general level, those questions cannot be separated, since you cannot make the judgements without having the concept, and you have the concept only if you do count such considerations as relevant in deliberation.
MR will come in, it seems to me, only if it comes in with such concepts. The phronimos will exercise his perception, presumably, in seeing that certain considerations of this sort apply. In so judging, he can judge something true. Equally, someone who misses the point, is obtuse, fails in phronêsis, may be said to have missed a truth, overlooked something, and so forth. Is this enough to speak of realism?
One might say so. However, much of what is said about realism suggests a stronger condition than this. The requirement will be not only that true judgements can be made under the concept, and that one user of the concept can point out to another that he has missed an application. It will, further, have to be true that people who do not use that concept at all are missing something—that the concept “picks up on” an aspect of the world that an attentive and interested observer should acknowledge. But this further condition does not follow from what is indisputably true about thick concepts. With regard to many of them, it is hard to accept; and it is impossible to accept it of all of them taken together (because the thick concepts of different societies are often not combinable, and we have no idea of how they might all be mapped onto one grid).
Aristotle did hold a quite strong position about such concepts: that a definitive set of them represented the best achievable human understanding of the ethical. Is Aristotle’s position a version of the view which, I have just suggested, might be identified with MR? Only, I suggest, if one accepts more of Aristotle’s philosophy than his ethics. For Aristotle, a certain set of thick ethical concepts, including those that define the virtues themselves, provide the best achievable human understanding of the ethical in this sense, that their intelligent use in a life that they serve to define as virtuous is the most satisfying life accessible to a human being. The set of concepts is, one might say, ethically categorical. This is not, for us, obviously the same idea as that expressed by MR (as we are presently interpreting it), which is rather that of certain concepts being cognitively categorical: one who does not use some or all of them has left an important element out of his understanding of the world. So for us, the basic Aristotelian idea, and the suggested interpretation of MR, are distinct. Aristotle himself, however, had further conceptions in the light of which those two ideas are not distinct, but come to much the same thing.
We can, in our own way, seek to remove the gap between the two ideas, by saying that the sense of “understanding the world” that is appropriate to these concepts must be that of ethically understanding the world: these concepts are, after all, hardly going to help us make a contribution to the physical or biological sciences. But our difference from Aristotle’s situation is measured precisely by the fact that we need to make this point. Aristotle could see ethics as connected to biology in a way that made human flourishing, understood in terms of a rational ethical life, as straightforwardly an application to us of explanatory categories that apply to all species; you would mention this kind of flourishing in saying what kind of living thing a human being was. We do not share this picture, and it is a denial of history and of scientific change to pretend that we do.
Of course it is we, and not Aristotle, who deploy such formulae as “moral realism”, and we must decide what we mean by them. We also must decide how to make the best use, in our circumstances, of Aristotle’s ethics. But if we mean the kind of thing by “moral realism” that I have suggested, then even the fullest use we might reasonably make of Aristotle’s ethics will not in itself lead us to MR. It would do that only if we accepted Aristotle’s own account of the relation of human ethical life to everything else, and that, certainly, we cannot reasonably do.
1 “When he chooses to exercise” already picks out a difference from the virtues, of course: one that is picked up by condition (iii), as noted below.
2 Ethics with Aristotle (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1991), 89.
3 Particularly on the force of proairetikê, ibid., p. 78. On the relation of the conjuncts, see p. 87. It is worth saying that the question whether kai is “epexegetic” is quite complexly related to questions about the role of proairesis in the good life. It should be remembered that proairesis is not peculiar to the virtuous. See below, pp. 195–96 and note 8.
4 NE 1115b12, 1120a23, 1122b6.
5 One of the passages mentioned in note 4 above relates the general role of to kalon to the case of courage: “the brave man holds his position for the sake of to kalon: for this is the telos of virtue”, 1115b12.
6 It is worth saying that this result is not a product of my taking “self-control” as the executive virtue in question. On Aristotle’s account of sôphrosunê, the point is still more obvious.
7 NE 1146b23–24; cf. 1151a7 for an association between kakia (vice) and proairesis.
8 It is important that “having the concept” here means “possessing it as one’s own”, where this implies being disposed to use it in judgements with which one is identified. One can understand such a concept, as an anthropologist does, without satisfying this condition.
SIXTEEN
Introductory Essay on Descartes’ Meditations
‘I would not urge anyone to read this book except those who are able and willing to meditate seriously with me’, Descartes says to his readers in the Preface, and he makes it clear that he means the Meditations not to be a treatise, a mere exposition of philosophical reasons and conclusions, but rather an exercise in thinking, presented as an encouragement and a guide to readers who will think philosophically themselves. Its thoughts, correspondingly, are presented as they might be conducted by its author—or rather, as though they were being conducted at the very moment at which you read them. Indeed, the ‘I’ who is having these thoughts may be yourself. Although we are conscious, in reading the Meditations, that they were written by a particular person, René Descartes, and at a particular time, about 1640, the ‘I’ that appears throughout them from the first sentence on does not specifically represent that person: it represents anyone who will step into the position it marks, the position of the thinker who is prepared to reconsider and recast his or her beliefs, as Descartes supposed we might, from the ground up.
This ‘I’ is different, then, from the ‘I’ that occurs in the Replies to the Objections. In the Replies, Descartes speaks straightforwardly for himself, and the ‘I’ represents the author of the Meditations. The ‘I’ in the Meditations themselves represents their narrator or protagonist, whom we may call ‘the thinker’. Of course the author has to take responsibility for the thinker’s reflections. He takes responsibility both for the conduct of them and for their outcome, where that includes the beliefs to which we shall have been led if we are persuaded by the arguments, and also the improved states of mind that the author expects us to reach by following his work. But the author is not answerable for every notion entertained by the thinker and for every turn that the reflection takes on the way. The series of thoughts has an upshot or culmination, reached in the Sixth Meditation, and some of the thinker’s earlier thoughts have been overcome and left behind in the process of reaching that final point.
Some of those who submitted the Objections found it hard to follow the working out of this idea, and to see how far the thinker had got at various points in the process of reflection. It is still hard today, and commentators’ discussions of the Meditations often take the form of asking how much at a given stage Descartes takes himself to have established. In such discussions, it is Descartes and his intentions that come into question; the modern objectors address themselves, if less directly than the objectors whose texts appear in this volume, to the author. It was, after all, Descartes who gave the thinker the directions he follows. There is a suggestion implicit in the beginning of the work that the thinker does not know how it will all turn out: but that is a fiction.
To say that it is a fiction is not necessarily to say that in terms of the work itself it is untrue. This might have been a work in which the thinker’s fictional ignorance of how his reflections would turn out was convincingly sustained. To some extent it is so, and to that extent, one of the gifts offered to the reader by this extraordinary work is a freedom to write it differently, to set out with the thinker and end up in a different place. The rewriting of Descartes’ story in that way has constituted a good deal of modern philosophy.
However, it would be wrong to suggest that the Meditations offers no more than an invitation to philosophical reflection, by asking some questions and showing one way in which they might be answered. We are expected, rather, to sense the author’s guiding hand throughout. Modern readers may take this for granted too easily, because they underestimate Descartes’ intention to engage the reader in the argument. They may think of the Meditations as just a device that Descartes chose to get across the opinions that we now find ascribed to him in histories of philosophy. It is, certainly, a device for convincing us, but it is more than that, because it aims to convince us by making us conduct the argument ourselves.
The first readers of the Meditations may have felt the author’s guiding presence for a different reason, that they were conscious of a kind of writing that it resembled. It was, and remains, a very unusual work, and there had never been a work of philosophy presented in such a form before. But there did exist, familiarly, works of religious meditation, and Descartes’ book self-consciously resembles them. Like many of them, it is ostensibly divided between days of contemplation and, again like them, it encourages and helps the reader to overcome and get rid of misleading and seductive states of the soul, so as to arrive at an understanding of his or her own nature and of a created being’s relations with God.
Those who wrote religious meditations were acting as guides to a spiritual discipline. Descartes’ work gives his readers guidance in an intellectual discipline, and helps them to discover in themselves pure intellectual conceptions—of matter, of mind and of God—from which they will be able to form a true and unclouded understanding of the world. The inquiry in which he leads them does indeed yield a conviction of the existence of God. There is no reason at all to suppose that Descartes was insincere in these religious affirmations (though theories that ascribe to him complex strategies of deceit have a strange capacity to survive). What is true is that the thoughts that lead to these conclusions are not in the least religious in spirit, and God’s existence is established as a purely metaphysical conclusion. Anything to do with a religious life or, indeed, with any distinctively religious aspects of life, will have to come in after Descartes’ reflections are over. The Meditations, though they have an analogy to traditional meditations that belong to the religious life, assuredly do not belong to it themselves.
A still greater difference lies in the authority with which the two kinds of works were offered. The authors of religious meditations claimed authority from their own experience, but also, most often, from a religious office. Descartes does not suppose that his right to claim a reader’s attention lies in any sacramental, traditional or professional position. His authority to show us how to think lies only in this, that he has himself, as he supposes, uncovered methods of simple, clear-headed and rational inquiry which all reasonable people can conduct if they clear their minds of prejudice and address themselves in a straightforward way to the questions. No special training, no religious discipline, no knowledge of texts or of history is needed in order to do this. He was disposed to think, in fact, that such things could be an actual obstacle.
His justification for believing that his readers had these powers, if only they could use them, is to be found in the Meditations themselves. If we follow Descartes to the end of them and accept his considerations, we shall have come to a conception of ourselves as rational, immaterial selves born with pure intellectual ideas and a capacity for reasoning which enable us to grasp in basic respects the nature of the world. Each of us does indeed exist in some kind of union with a particular physical body. ‘My body’, one says, and Descartes took this phrase to register a profound truth, that what one truly is, is a mind ‘really distinct’ from the body. We need sensory information provided through the body not only to survive in the material world, but to find out particular scientific laws. But our own nature, the existence of God and indeed the most abstract structural features of the physical world itself can be discovered, Descartes supposed, by directed intelligence and rational insight.
Among these things we discover, when we direct our intelligence in the right way, is that we are beings who are capable of making just such discoveries, and we gain insight into the way in which we can make them. So we discover also how the Meditations, a work of pure reflection aiming to free us from error and to help us understand these basic matters, can succeed. Its end lies in its beginning, not just because its author knows how the thinker will come out, but in the philosophical sense that if we undertake to follow its method of inquiry, our doing so, Descartes supposed, is justified by our being the kind of creatures that it finally shows us to be.
The method deployed and invoked in the Meditations works, to an important degree, through argument, clear chains of reasoning. This tells us something of how to read the book. We are asked to argue, not merely through it, but with it. Because of this, it is specially appropriate that the book was associated, at its first publication, with Objections and Replies. Descartes had some political motives in having the Objections assembled, as he also did in dedicating the book to the Sorbonne. He wanted to have his work accepted by the religious authorities. For the same reason, he did not welcome all the Objections that were collected by his friend Mersenne, who organised the enterprise, being embarrassed in particular by those of the English sceptic and materialist Hobbes. But whatever the strategy of the publication, it was true to the spirit of the work, as Descartes clearly believed, that it should appear together with arguments attempting to refute it or defend it.
If we are to read the Meditations properly, we must remember that the thinker is not simply the author. We must not forget that the work is a carefully designed whole, of great literary cunning, and that it rarely lays out arguments in a complete or formal way. But this does not mean that it is not sustained by argument, or that arguing with it is in appropriate. It means only that we must read it carefully to find out what its arguments are, and what Descartes is taking for granted. If we reflect on what he is taking for granted or asking us by implication to accept, we are doing part of what he invited us to do, when he asked us to meditate with him.
A question of what he is taking for granted presents itself right at the beginning. ‘Reason now leads me to think’, he writes in the First Meditation,
that I should hold back my assent from opinions which are not completely certain and indubitable just as carefully as I do from those which are patently false. So, for the purpose of rejecting all my opinions, it will be enough if I find in each of them at least some reason for doubt. And to do this I will not need to run through them all individually . . . Once the foundations of a building are undermined, anything built on them collapses of its own accord; so I will go straight for the basic principles on which all my former beliefs rested.
Why does reason now lead him to think this? Everyone is engaged in trying to get information about matters of concern to him; some, such as Descartes, are involved in the sciences and want to arrive at systematic and reasoned beliefs about nature. But no one ordinarily supposes that the rational way to start on these things is to throw away or lay aside all the information one thinks one already has. Descartes thinks not only that this is the right course for him, but that it is self-evidently the right course for him. Why should he think this? Why should doubt seem the path to knowledge, if there is a path to knowledge at all?
We must notice first that the approach is not supposed to be applied to the ordinary affairs of life. Descartes makes that point over and over again, saying for instance that we must distinguish between ‘the actions of life’ and ‘the search for truth’; and in the Synopsis to the Meditations he is prepared to use such a distinction even to define what counts as serious: ‘no sane person has ever seriously doubted these things’. He does not mean that the results of his reflections will not affect ordinary practice or the conduct of the sciences. On the contrary, this is what he hopes they will do, setting the sciences, for instance, on the right path. Nor does he think that these reflections are a trivial way of passing the time. They cannot be that, if eventually they could have these practical and scientific effects. He may think that it is particularly his own, the author’s, use of the Doubt that will have those effects, but he also believes that it is a worthwhile exercise for any of us, once in a lifetime, to take temporarily the position of the thinker of such reflections, and this will not be a trivial undertaking, either. Indeed, he himself said that the meditation to which he invited us in the Preface was itself, in its own way, ‘serious’.
When Descartes says that the thoughts deploying the Doubt are to be separated from practical life, and in that sense (but only in that sense) are not ‘serious’, he is defining a special kind of intellectual project which by its nature can be conducted only if it is separated from all other activities. In ordinary life, when we want the truth on a subject, we pursue it, necessarily, in a context of other things that we are aiming to do, including other inquiries we need to make. The pattern of our inquiries is formed by many constraints on how we can spend our time and energies, and by considerations of what we risk by failing to look into one thing or spending too long looking into another. These constant and often implicit calculations of the economics of inquiry help to shape the body of our beliefs; and they have the consequence that our beliefs, while they aim at truth, will, inevitably, only partly achieve it. Descartes conceived of a project that would be purely the search for truth, and would be unconstrained by any other objectives at all. Because it temporarily lays aside the demands of practical rationality, it has to be detached from practice; and because it is concerned with truth and nothing else, it has to raise its requirements to the highest conceivable level, and demand nothing less than absolute certainty.
The search has to take place out of this world, so to speak, and its nature, its internal purpose, explains why this should be. But there is still a question about its external purpose. Why should Descartes or anyone else, once in a lifetime, take time out of the world to pursue this project? Descartes can commend it to us in more than one way, but his own principal reason is that he is looking for what he calls, at the start of the First Meditation and in many other places, ‘foundations’ of knowledge. To serve this purpose, the Doubt has to be methodical. A refusal to take things for granted that might be doubtful is part of Descartes’ general intellectual method, which he had introduced in his earlier work The Discourse on the Method; the Doubt is an extreme application of that idea, conditioned by the circumstances of the special project, the radical search for certainty. The Doubt is deployed for defined purposes, and from the start it is under control.
It was not a new idea that scepticism might be used for its beneficial effects. Sceptics in the ancient world, Pyrrhonians and others, had advocated such techniques for their own purposes; their teachings had been revived since the Reformation, and sceptical views were in the air at the time that Descartes wrote. Some of his critics complained that material he deployed, for instance about the errors of the senses, was old stuff. But Descartes could rightly reply that while scepticism was no new thing, his use of it was indeed new. When the Pyrrhonians deployed sceptical considerations, it was in order to calm and eradicate an unsatisfiable urge for knowledge; and it was rather in this spirit, sixty years before the Meditations, that Montaigne had written. But Descartes’ aim was precisely the opposite, to use scepticism to help in acquiring knowledge, and to bring out from a sceptical inquiry the result that knowledge was, after all, possible. The Doubt served that purpose by eliminating false conceptions; and the fact that it was possible to use it in this way and then overcome it gave the fundamental reassurance that a proper science would have nothing to fear from the doubts of the sceptics. Descartes’ Doubt was to be both revelatory and preemptive.
‘Foundations of knowledge’ can mean more than one thing. Descartes has often been thought to be searching for foundations in the sense of axioms from which the whole of knowledge or, more particularly, the whole of science, might be deduced, as in a geometrical system. In fact, this is rarely his concern, and it does not represent his understanding of what a completed science would be like. Historians classify Descartes as a ‘rationalist’, but this should not be taken to mean that he supposed mere rational reflection to be enough to establish scientific conclusions. He was a rationalist, rather, in his views about the origins of scientific concepts. He thought that the terms in which physics should describe the world were given to rational reflection, and he supposed them to be, in fact, purely mathematical. It was only by empirical investigation and experiment, however, that we could discover which descriptions, expressed in those terms, were true of the actual world.
Basically, the Doubt provides foundations for knowledge because it helps to eliminate error. Descartes’ aim was not so much to find truths from which all scientific knowledge could be deduced, but rather to identify false or doubtful propositions which were implied by our everyday beliefs and so made those beliefs themselves unreliable. One belief of this kind was that objects in the external world had just the qualities that they seem to have, such as colour. The Doubt helped in eliminating this very general error, which could then be replaced by the sound conviction that objects, in themselves, had only the properties ascribed to them by mathematical physics. Once this corrected view had been laid bare and found indubitable in the process of orderly reflection, it could from then on serve as a sound foundation of our understanding of the world.
Proceeding in this way, Descartes could indeed ‘go straight for the basic principles on which all my former beliefs rested’. The workings of the Doubt are adjusted to these aims. In its most extreme, ‘hyperbolical’, form, the Doubt is embodied in the fiction that a malicious demon, ‘of the utmost power and cunning has employed all his energies in order to deceive me’. This device provides Descartes with a thought-experiment that can be generally applied: if there were an indefinitely powerful agency who was misleading me to the greatest conceivable extent, would this kind of belief or experience be correct? Thinking in these terms, Descartes is led to identify whole tracts of his ordinary experience he may lay aside, so that he suspends belief in the whole of the material world, including his own body.
It is significant, however, and characteristic of the way in which the Meditations unfolds, that Descartes does not start his sceptical inquiry with this extreme device. We are invited to get used to sceptical thinking gradually, by considering first more familiar and realistic occasions of error. He starts with illusions of the senses, in which we mistake the shape of a distant tower, for instance, or suppose a straight stick, partly in water, to be bent. Such examples remind us that we can be mistaken, and that even by everyday canons the world need not really be as it presents itself to our perception. There is little in these cases, however, to encourage the more generally sceptical idea that on any given occasion when we take ourselves to be perceiving something, we may be mistaken. He thinks that we are led to that further and more radical idea by reflection on the ‘errors of our dreams’. The phenomenon of dreaming creates a more general and more puzzling scepticism because, first, it is true (or at least the sceptic pretends that it is true) that anything we can perceive we can dream we perceive; and, second, there is no way of telling at the time of dreaming whether we are dreaming or not. So it seems that at any moment I can ask ‘how do I know that I am not dreaming now?’, and find it hard to give an answer. But what I can do, at any rate, if the question has occurred to me, is to ‘bracket’ these experiences, and not commit myself on the question of whether they are waking experiences which are reliable, or dreams which are delusive.
Once I am prepared to do this, I am well started on the sceptical journey. So far I have reached only the distributive doubt, on any occasion I may be mistaken, but reflecting on the possibility that I can have a set of experiences that do not correspond to anything real, I am nearly ready to take the step, with the help of the malicious demon, to the final and collective doubt, I may be mistaken all the time. In his description of what dreams are Descartes already lays the ground for what is to come. In the Sixth Meditation he says that he did not believe that what he seemed to perceive when he was dreaming came ‘from things located outside me’. In an everyday sense, certainly, that description of a dream must be correct. But the description has acquired some large implications by the time I reach the last Meditation, and, having accepted the ‘real distinction’ between mind and body, understand that my body is itself something ‘outside me’.
Every step in the sceptical progress should be questioned. It is at the beginning that all the seeds are sown of the philosophical system that has come to life by the end of the Meditations. To take just one example of questions that the thinker’s reflections invite, do these facts about dreaming, even if we accept them, really lead to the conclusion that I can never know whether I am awake? Why, in particular, does the thinker take dreaming so seriously for his purposes, and not madness? He simply dismisses the deranged people who think that their heads are made of earthenware, or that they are pumpkins, or made of glass. Perhaps Bourdin, the author of the Seventh Objections, makes a good point in suggesting that the two conditions should be treated together. There is of course this difference, that the mad are assumed unable to conduct the meditation at all: the thinker turns away from them, treats them in the third person, because they cannot join him and the reader in thinking through these things, whereas we who are the readers have dreams, as the thinker has. But is this enough of a difference? Descartes and his thinker cannot speak to us when we are dreaming. Descartes seemingly thinks that if we are sane, we can be sure that we are, even though mad people cannot tell that they are mad. So why should the fact that when we are dreaming, we cannot tell that we are, imply that we cannot be sure we are awake when we are awake? There may be an answer to that question; but we should not let the argument from dreams go by until we have considered what it might be.
The Meditations use the Doubt to lead out of the Doubt into knowledge and a correct conception of things. In doing that, they do not merely provide a sounder conception: they show that we can reach such a conception, and demonstrate that knowledge is to be had. The foundations that Descartes believes himself at the end to have discovered are also foundations of the possibility of knowledge. That is why the scepticism of the Meditations is preemptive. Descartes claimed that he had taken the doubts of the sceptics farther than the sceptics had taken them, and had been able to come out the other side.
The rebuttal of scepticism depends on the existence of a God who has created us and who is ‘no deceiver’. If we do our own part in clarifying our thoughts (as the thinker does in the Meditations) and we seek the truth as seriously as we can, God will not allow us to be systematically mistaken. However hard we think about these matters, however much we clarify our understanding of what an ‘external’ world might be, we are left with a conviction that there is such a world—a conviction so powerful that it needed the extreme device of the malicious demon temporarily to displace it. It would be contrary to the benevolence and the trustworthiness of God that this conviction should be untrue.
It is essential that we should have done our own part. God cannot be expected to underwrite confused conceptions which have not been carefully examined. If we do not accept a sound intellectual discipline, we deceive ourselves and are responsible for our errors. (This is one way in which Descartes thinks that the will is involved in belief.) Equally, God’s benevolence does not guarantee us against every error, but only against general and systematic error. We remain liable to occasional mistakes, such as those of defective perception and also those of dreams, which before these reassurances seemed to offer a sceptical threat. Particular errors are caused by our bodily constitution, and it is not surprising that we should be subject to them. The sceptics’ threat was that our entire picture of things might be wrong: now we have an assurance, because God is no deceiver, that this cannot be so.
But have we? Those who offered Objections were only the first among many to doubt whether Descartes’ argument succeeds, even in its own terms. In the course of the Meditations, the sceptic has been allowed to cast doubt, it seems, even on the convictions that ground the belief in God. This doubt must be resisted, but how, in resisting it, can we appeal to the existence and nature of God, without arguing in a circle? Descartes’ answer to this objection emphasises that a doubt about the proofs of God, and their implications for the validation of our thoughts, can be entertained only when one is not actually considering them. At the time they are clearly considered, these proofs are supposed to be as compelling as any other basic certainty—that I cannot think without existing, for instance, or that twice two is four. So when the sceptic professes to doubt the proofs of God, or any other such certainty, it can be only because he is not actually considering them at that time. All one can do is to refer him back to them; if he does properly consider them, he will, then, be convinced.
All this Descartes clearly says, but it is a little less clear what he expects us, and the sceptic, to make of it. His idea may be this, that if the sceptic reverts to his doubts when he has stopped thinking clearly about the proofs, we have earned the right by then simply to forget about him. He is merely insisting that we go on giving the answer—an answer we indeed have—to one question, his question, instead of getting on with our scientific inquiries or other practical activities, rather as though we were required to spend all our time out of the world with the thinker. We have offered all the justifications we could in principle offer, and now have the right to see the dispute as one about how to spend our time. If the sceptic were still to offer some basis for his doubts, it seems that it could now lie only in the idea that intellectual concentration was itself the enemy of truth: that you are more likely to be right about these matters if you do not think carefully about them than if you do. This idea is denied by the procedures of the sceptic, as well as by those of Descartes’ thinker; in starting on the Meditations themselves, or any other inquiry, we implicitly reject it.
Modern readers will want to consider how exactly Descartes answers the problem of the ‘Cartesian Circle’, and whether his answer, in his own terms, is a good one. Few of them, however, will accept those terms, or agree that the theological foundation he offers for science and everyday belief is convincing. Descartes was very insistent that science itself should be thoroughly mechanistic and should not offer explanations in terms of God’s purposes or any kind of teleology. In this, he was one of the major prophets of the seventeenth-century scientific revolution. Yet his justification of the possibility of such a science itself lay in God, and in a kind of teleology, a conviction that the world cannot be such that our desire to know must be ultimately misguided or frustrated. Perhaps we still have some version of that conviction, but if so, it is not for those reasons, and it could not be used to provide foundations for science.
To Descartes’ contemporaries, it seemed much more obvious that God existed and was no deceiver than that natural science was possible. Neither the successes nor the institutions of modern science yet existed. For us, science is manifestly possible, and because it is so, the demand is less pressing than it seemed to Descartes that it should be justified from the ground up. We may feel happier than he did to live without foundations of knowledge. But that must leave us open to questions of how that can be so. We need to know what the science that is so manifestly possible, is. Does it describe a world that is there anyway, independently of us? What does this question itself mean? How do we, with our thoughts and our bodies, fit into our picture of the natural world? We cannot do with Descartes’ Meditations everything that he hoped to achieve with them himself, but there remain many good reasons to accept his invitation to them.
SEVENTEEN
Descartes and the Historiography of Philosophy
Discussing, some years ago, different ways of approaching the thought of Descartes, I made a broad distinction between two activities that I labelled ‘the history of ideas’ and ‘the history of philosophy’.1 The two are distinguished in the first place by their product. The history of ideas yields something that is history before it is philosophy, while with the history of philosophy it is the other way round. In particular, the product of the history of philosophy, being in the first place philosophy, admits more systematic regimentation of the thought under discussion. The two activities can be distinguished also by having rather different directions of attention. The history of ideas, as I intended the distinction, naturally looks sideways to the context of a philosopher’s ideas, in order to realize what their author might be doing in making those assertions in that situation. The history of philosophy, on the other hand, is more concerned to relate a philosopher’s conception to present problems, and is likely to look at his influence on the course of philosophy from his time to the present.
It is obvious that these two activities cannot be totally separated from one another, and each needs to some extent the skills of the other. It would be a mistake, however, to suppose that the distinction is simply baseless, or that the best possible historical approach to a philosopher would consist in an ideal fusion of these two activities. There is more than one reason why this cannot be so. One is that the best possible history of ideas is likely to show that the philosophy did not in fact mean in contemporary terms what subsequent philosophy has most made of it. But, apart from that, the kinds of sensibility needed for the two activities are bound to yield partly incompatible products, in rather the way that Impressionism, by exploring as intensely as possible the surface effects of light, was thereby debarred from giving as much information about structure as was accessible to some other styles of painting.
I have said that the approach associated with what I called ‘the history of philosophy’ is marked out both by a concern that its product should be in good part philosophy, and also by an interest in diachronic influence (a dimension which the phrase itself, of course, particularly suggests). It is important, however, that these two points do not simply, or always easily, go together. One way of putting the philosophy of the past to use in present terms is to neglect or overlook, to some extent, the history that lies between that philosophy and the present day, and to reconsider the philosophy in partial independence from its actual influence. It has been a particular speciality, in fact, of the analytic history of philosophy to approach the philosophy of the past in this way. At its extreme, this activity could take the form of triumphant anachronism, as when it used to be said, in the heyday of analytic confidence, that we should approach the works of Plato as though they had appeared in last month’s issue of Mind. The claim that it did actually proceed in this way is now one of the standard charges associated with the demonized image of analytical history of philosophy.
Other charges against analytical history of philosophy are that it suffers from the limitations of analytic philosophy itself, in considering only a narrow range of philosophical interests; and that it neglects the literary dimension of philosophical works, so that—in the case of some of them, at least—it misses a good deal of what can be got from them even philosophically. Finally, there is the charge of its obtrusive cockiness, the condescension with which earlier writers are treated to instruction by current philosophical methods, and are reproved for their errors—errors to which they have been committed, typically, by the way in which analytical philosophy interprets them. All these charges are certainly true, in the sense that there are very many works in this style to which one or more, and often all, of the charges can justly be applied. I shall not discuss all the charges here.
The first of the charges, however (and, to some extent, the last), raises the question not only of how such activities should be conducted, but of why. The idea of treating philosophical writings from the past as though they were contemporary is, at the limit, simply unintelligible. If one abstracts entirely from their history—including in this both the history of their context and the history of their influence—one has an obvious problem of what object one is even supposed to be considering. One seems to be left simply with a set of words in some modern language (which, in many cases, have been generated by a translator), and one associates with these words whatever philosophical notions they may carry with them today. This activity has no title to being history of any sort. But even when the activity is less arbitrary than this suggests, there remains a question of its point. The point of any history, one might suppose, is to achieve some distance from the present, which can help one to understand the present. The more extreme forms of analytical history of philosophy addressed themselves to removing that distance altogether, and in doing so lost the title to being any pointful form of historical activity. In these extreme forms, they owed their existence only to the fact that something called ‘the history of philosophy’ appeared in the syllabus, and they provided a philosophical activity to fill this place.
However it may have been in earlier years, these very extreme forms of the analytical history of philosophy do now belong to the demonology of the subject, and are rarely to be found in inhabited places in the daylight. There is a good deal of history of philosophy that uses analytical techniques, and yet is genuinely and non-arbitrarily historical; it is still history of philosophy in my terms, which is to say that its product is to an important extent philosophy. To justify its existence, it must maintain a historical distance from the present, and it must do this in terms that sustain its identity as philosophy. It is just to this extent that it can indeed be useful, because it is just to this extent that it can help us to deploy ideas of the past in order to understand our own. We can adapt to the history of philosophy a remark that Nietzsche made about classical philology: ‘I cannot imagine what [its] meaning would be in our own age, if it is not to be untimely—that is, to act against the age, and by so doing to have an effect on the age, and, let us hope, to the benefit of a future age.’3 One way in which the history of philosophy can help to serve this purpose is the basic and familiar one of making the familiar seem strange, and conversely, but it needs to learn how better to do this. We should bear in mind this well-known aim of history—and specifically of a history that aims in some part to be philosophy—in turning, now, to some more specific questions about Descartes.
It used to be true (and may still be so) that the guide to the Panthéon in Paris would say at one point of the tour: ‘Ici, mesdames et messieurs, vous voyez le tombeau du plus grand philosophe français, Jean-Jacques Rousseau.’ One wonders what he would say if, as very nearly happened, Descartes’ body had also ended up in the Panthéon. Indeed, there are rather more similarities between the two than the usual descriptions allow. Both are marvellous writers, both are extremely self-consciously original, both have been massively influential, and, despite having very different attitudes towards antiquity, they have both centrally contributed to a distinctively modern consciousness. In these last respects, moreover, each of them presents problems to the history of ideas and to the history of philosophy: each of them has had an influence that owes a great deal to gigantic misunderstandings, and each has been made use of in ways neither of them could, needless to say, either have foreseen or have tolerated. Going back to their original context, and to the influences on them, may indeed help to remove those misunderstandings, but at the same time it raises the question, in each case, of the thinker’s originality.
In neither case is the originality to be denied—it is a question rather of its nature. With both of them, it is a matter of conscious self-presentation; it is not the more nearly naïve originality of Frege or of C. S. Peirce. In Descartes’ case, this raises two questions. The first is where the idea of such a self-presentation came from. Descartes’ methodological and metaphysical turn towards himself has been associated often enough with such influences as Augustine and Montaigne, but they do not provide enough to explain his presentation of his project as a way of life. The modes of ‘self-fashioning’ that Stephen Greenblatt has discussed in relation to the Renaissance consciousness4 are perhaps relevant to the idea that Descartes had formed of what he was to do, an idea formed, of course, while he was pursuing the life of a soldier. In the words of Ausonius which he recalled, ‘Quod vitae sectaboriter?’, it is important that the word is iter, not via: there is a journey to be made.
The second question concerns what we might find in Descartes if we removed the ‘misunderstandings’ that have so immeasurably contributed to and formed his influence. In asking this question, I am not looking for an understanding of Descartes that is free of later presuppositions, which benefits from no hindsight. Clearly, there could be no such thing. It is a question, rather, of its not benefiting from this hindsight, or the presuppositions peculiarly associated with our inherited history of philosophy. (This is one way in which we can aim to make the familiar strange again.) As things are, the history of ideas and the history of philosophy, applied to Descartes, are likely to yield, respectively, one of two types of understanding, one purely historical, and the other largely anachronistic. The history of ideas quite properly invites us to learn about late scholastic influences and the syllabus at La Flèche, or introduces us to problems that were encountered in developing an adequate mechanics of inertia. The history of philosophy, on the other hand, speaks in terms of how one can develop a non-transcendental epistemology starting from scepticism. The first of these two activities, the history of ideas, certainly has nothing wrong with it, but, in itself, it does not yield much philosophy that can help us in reviving a sense of strangeness or questionability about our own philosophical assumptions. It may be, simply and quietly, what it seeks to be, about the past. The history of philosophy, very often, does no more to release us from our preconceptions, for the different reason that it is merely constructed out of our pre-conceptions. The important thing about these two approaches is not that one is historical in relation to Descartes, while the other is anachronistic. The point, rather, is that neither of them, as things are, helps us to use Descartes to gain what Nietzsche called an ‘untimely’ perspective on our philosophical concerns. The first fails to do so because it does not, in itself, yield philosophy; the second yields philosophy, but only too much of the time it yields our philosophy.
Any philosopher who is likely to be of interest now to the history of philosophy is going to raise questions of this kind. But such questions are specially raised by Descartes, because he makes a unique claim to the suspect title ‘the founder of modern philosophy’. At least two difficulties attach to this title, and to Descartes’ relation to it. One of them is closely connected to the matter I mentioned before, of Descartes’ self-presentation. A difficulty in getting behind this title is that Descartes seems to have arranged things, in particular his presentation of himself, in order to invite such a title; to a greater extent than many philosophers, Descartes is the architect of his own reputation and, by the same token, responsible for some of the misunderstandings that have attached themselves to that reputation.
A more general difficulty lies in the shifting content of the idea of ‘modern philosophy’ and of what could count as being its founder.‘Modern philosophy’ used to mean our philosophy, but perhaps that is no longer true: some would say that ‘modern’ now signified only a period in the history of philosophy, a period that is closed or is closing. Perhaps it makes less difference than one might suppose to the present discussion whether one accepts that description or not. Even if the ‘modern philosophy’ that Descartes founded is taken to be the philosophy to which our discussions still contribute, Descartes’ relation to it has for a long time been problematical or contested. The view which takes the philosophy of language rather than epistemology as the heart of philosophy has already for a long time relegated Descartes to the role of anti-hero, and has replaced him with Frege in the position of the founder of legitimate modern philosophical activity. This view itself, of course, has various ways of using Descartes, with the result that he remains part of the discourse of philosophy. One important use is indeed in the role of anti-hero: his works (or a few of them) are read (or partly read) as the most challenging and informatively misleading example of what is to be rejected.
Even in this role, however, he is rather paradoxically used. Those who have wanted to displace epistemology, and in particular a concern with scepticism, from a central place in philosophy have in many cases claimed to be interested in diagnosing the apparent attractions of the problem; they have wanted to replace attempts to answer it with an understanding of why we are tempted into it. Descartes is typically wheeled out as an example of one who indulged himself in trying to answer the problem of scepticism, but not so much, it seems, as someone from whom we can learn about the temptations to get into it. He is typically presented, in his brief appearance at the beginning of philosophy courses, as one who simply had a weakness for scepticism, or perhaps for mathematical certainty; or a brief expedition is made into the history of ideas to bring back an externalist explanation in terms of seventeenth-century Christian apologetics.
This obviously does little good for the understanding of Descartes or of scepticism, and it is fairly damaging to a sense of philosophy itself and of its history. If one presents Descartes as the founder of modern philosophy, and as seized by the problem of scepticism; if the problem of scepticism is said to be interesting not for its solution, but for the motives that lead to it; and if Descartes is not represented as displaying any interesting motive for it, but is diagnosed as being trapped in history, or (as it is more usually explained) in whatever misconception particularly impresses the teacher as providing the source of scepticism: a student will reasonably conclude, not only that Descartes is a fool, or at least that he has been overtaken by history, but, more damagingly, that a subject which not only has him as its founder but thinks it important that one should now read the works of such a founder cannot be a very serious subject. Descartes’ own approach to his problems had better be presented as adequate to our own interest both in them and in him.
Not every view of Descartes as part of present philosophy need treat him as an anti-hero. He can be taken to be the founder of a modern philosophy to which we still belong in virtue of more general characteristics of his work that we strive to share: that it claims to persuade by argument and the fact that its starting-point (unlike its conclusions) is not religious. This view of Descartes depends, like the anti-hero view, on interpreting it so as to make a particular kind of sense as philosophy. It depends, that is to say, on the activity that I called ‘the history of philosophy’. But, equally, those who wish to detach themselves from ‘modern philosophy’, leaving Descartes as the founder of a certain period in philosophy’s history, cannot do without the activity of interpreting him in ways that result in a set of philosophical claims. Their style of doing this is likely to lean more heavily in the direction of interpreting his philosophy in terms of a set of supposed influences. The need to separate the activities the writers would like us to pursue from something now delimited as having been ‘modern philosophy’ requires them to identify a set of recent philosophical activities, the activities of ‘modern philosophy’, precisely as having been influenced by Descartes.
This post-modern approach, as it may be called, typically runs the risk of a split consciousness. On the one hand, it has to take the history of philosophy seriously enough to constitute a tradition; it has to detect enough continuity of concerns and assumptions to support the claims of influence. On the other hand, if it looks closely enough, it will, of course, find that the influence has worked, and the tradition been constituted, through misunderstanding. The writers it invokes will, at the very least, have made partial and selective use of earlier writers, since that is what creative writers, philosophers or not, of course do with the writers they read. Now the recognition of these facts need not destroy the image of the tradition; it may merely constitute it as a tradition of misunderstanding. But it has a damaging effect on the use that the post-modern critic can make of the tradition. The better its writers are understood, the less it looks as though they necessarily hang together as the ‘modernity’ that the critic wants to get beyond. Ironically enough, his own typical emphasis on contingency should make him less contented with the Hegelian classifications that define his own historical position.
He may say that he need not, after all, take his own historical position too seriously. The constitution of the ‘modern’ tradition, with Descartes as its founder, may figure simply as a ludic trope, which gains a certain edge from the fact that its members, including Descartes himself, usually do not seem, when they are more closely examined, to be doing quite what the story of the tradition requires them to be doing. But the only point of the ludic, at least as deployed in the history of philosophy, is to disturb and unsettle, and the effect of taking the tradition of modernity as given, with Descartes as its founder, can only be deeply settling and undisturbing, since it confronts us exactly with what we thought we had already. Our sense of our situation will be unsettled only when we come to see Descartes and the other supposed contributors as stranger than they seem while they are still regarded as the constituents of that tradition.
What was called in the original distinction ‘the history of philosophy’ is essential to any activity that is going to give a philosophical point to writing historically about philosophy. That point is going principally to be found in the possibility of the past philosophy’s being untimely, and helping to make strange what is familiar in our own assumptions. In order to do this, the history of philosophy must be separated from two tendencies with which it has often been associated. On the one hand, it cannot treat its object as though it were merely contemporary, without losing the point of historical distance altogether. On the other hand, it cannot be identified with the history of influence, the progressive exploitation of original writing in one or more philosophical traditions; this, again, destroys strangeness, by following a path which necessarily lands us at precisely the place we are at. What we must do is to use the philosophical materials that we now have to hand, together with historical understanding, in order to find in, or make from, the philosophy of the past a philosophical structure that will be strange enough to help us to question our present situation and the received picture of the tradition, including those materials themselves.
1 B. Williams, Descartes: The Project of Pure Enquiry, preface.
2 I have said something about the literary character of some philosophical works in B. Williams, Shame and Necessity, 13–14.
3 F. Nietzsche, ‘History in the Service or Disservice of Life’, in Unmodern Observations, ed. William Arrowsmith (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1990), 88.
4 S. Greenblatt, Renaissance Self-Fashioning (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1980).
HUME
TWENTY-ONE
Introduction to The Gay Science
The Gay Science is a remarkable book, both in itself and as offering a way into some of Nietzsche’s most important ideas. The history of its publication is rather complex, and it throws some light on the development of his thought and of his methods as a writer. He published the first edition of it in 1882. In that version, it consisted of only four books, and had no Preface, though it did have the ‘Prelude in Rhymes’. A second edition appeared in 1887, which added a fifth book, the Preface, and an Appendix of further poems. This is the work as we now know it, and which is translated here.
Between the two editions of The Gay Science, Nietzsche wrote two of his best-known works, Thus Spoke Zarathustra (1883–5) and Beyond Good and Evil (1886); the last section of Book Four of The Gay Science (342)1 is indeed virtually the same as the first section of Zarathustra. So the complete Gay Science brackets these two books, which are different from it and from each other. (Zarathustra, which is a peculiar literary experiment in a rhetoric drawn from the Bible, was once one of Nietzsche’s most popular works, but it has worn less well than the others.) Book Five of The Gay Science anticipates, in turn, some of the themes of another famous book which was to follow in 1887, On the Genealogy of Morality, which is again different in tone, sustaining a more continuous theoretical argument.
The Gay Science is a prime example of what is often called Nietzsche’s ‘aphoristic’ style. It consists of a sequence of sections which are not obviously tied to one another except, sometimes, in general content, and which do not offer a connected argument. The second half of Book Three, in particular, consists of many very short paragraphs of this kind. Elsewhere, however, there are longer passages, and in fact the arrangement of the shorter sections is not as fortuitous as it may look. It is often designed to gather thoughts which will, so to speak, circle in on some central theme or problem.
In his earlier works, Nietzsche had moved gradually towards this style. He had been appointed in 1869 as a professor of classical philology at the University of Basle, at the extraordinarily early age of twenty-four. He served in this position for ten years, resigning in 1879 because of the ill health which was to persist throughout his life. (The last letter he wrote, when in 1889 he broke down into insanity and a silence which lasted until his death in 1900, was to his distinguished colleague at Basle, Jacob Burckhardt, in which he said that he would rather have been a Swiss professor than God, but he had not dared to push egoism so far.) In his years at Basle he published first The Birth of Tragedy, which has the form, if not the content or the tone, of a treatise, and a set of four long essays collected as Untimely Meditations. In 1878–9 he brought out two books forming Human, All Too Human, followed in 1880 by a further part called ‘The Wanderer and his Shadow’, and in these writings he moved from continuous exposition and argument to setting out a sequence of thoughts which were not necessarily tied discursively to their neighbours, a style that allowed him to approach a question from many different directions. In Daybreak, which came out in 1881, the style is fully developed. As late as 25 January 1882 he still referred to what were to be the first books of The Gay Science as a continuation of Daybreak; by June they had acquired their separate title.
When he made that decision, he sensed that Book Four, which is called ‘Sanctus Januarius’ and invokes the spirit of the New Year, might be found obscure, and he was anxious about whether his correspondent, Peter Gast, would understand it. He knew that this was not just a set of penetrating, perhaps rather cynical, aperçus. ‘Aphorism’, the standard term which I have already mentioned, implies too strongly that each is supposed to be a squib, or a compact expression of a truth (often in the form of an exaggerated falsehood) in the style of the French writers La Rochefoucault and Chamfort, whom Nietzsche indeed admired, but whom he did not simply follow in giving a self-conscious exposé of some human failing, foible or piece of self-deception. There is a certain amount of that, particularly in the earlier books, but he was very aware of the risk that such aphorisms run of sliding from the daring through the knowing to the self-satisfied (it is not merely cynicism that he intends when he says in 379 that ‘we are artists of contempt’). His ambitions are deeper; the effect is meant to be cumulative, and its aim is more systematically subversive. A philosopher who had a similar intention, though in totally different connections, is the later Wittgenstein, and Nietzsche might have called the sections of this book, as Wittgenstein called the paragraphs of his manuscripts, ‘remarks’.
His remarks cover very various subjects. Many of them touch on what may be called moral psychology, and sometimes he does claim to detect an egoistic origin of some ethically approved reaction (as he does, for example, in the shrewd observation about magnanimity and revenge at section 49). The search for the ‘shameful origin’ of our moral sentiments was later to become an important principle of his genealogical method. u the is very clear that mere reductionism, the readily cynical explanation of all such attitudes in terms of self-interest, is a mistake. Partly this is because he does not think that self-interest is an individual’s basic motive anyway, and this book contains some quite complex, if unresolved, reflections on that question, in particular when he considers whether the virtues have a value for the individual who possesses them, or for the group. But, more broadly, Nietzsche thinks that the reductive spirit itself can be in error, a form of vulgarity (3), and that the ‘realists’ who congratulate themselves on having the measure of human unreason and self-deception are usually themselves in the grip of some ancient fantasy (57).
Above all, it is simply not enough, in Nietzsche’s view, to ‘unmask’ some supposedly honourable sentiment or opinion and leave it at that.‘Only as creators can we destroy’, he very significantly says (58). What things are called is fundamentally important, but a conventional set of names—as we may say, an interpretation—can be replaced only by another, more powerful, interpretation. When we say that one interpretation is more powerful than another, it is vitally important what counts as ‘power’. It is often said that Nietzsche explains everything in terms of power. This says something about the way in which he saw these problems, but it is wrong if it is supposed to state his solution to it. The point is very clear in On the Genealogy of Morality. There he tells a story of how a certain outlook or interpretation, embodying metaphysical illusions, came into existence as a psychological compensation for the weakness of people who were powerless, and how this outlook triumphed over the conventionally strong and their view of the world. The question must be, how could this have come about? What was the source of this new power? There had to be something to this new way of describing the world which accounted in naturalistic terms for its triumph, and Nietzsche fully accepts this, even if he does not have a very rich vocabulary of social explanation in which he can discuss what it might be. ‘Let us . . . not forget’, he goes on in section 58 of The Gay Science, ‘that in the long run it is enough to create new names and valuations and appearances of truth in order to create new “things” ’. Indeed, but this immediately raises the question, one to which Nietzsche returned in many different connections: what must someone do to ‘create’ new names?
The words ‘The Gay Science’ translate the German title ‘Die Fröhliche Wissenschaft’. No one, presumably, is going to be misled by the more recent associations of the word ‘gay’—it simply means joyful, light-hearted, and above all, lacking in solemnity (section 327, on taking things seriously, says something about this). ‘Science’ has its own difficulties. The word ‘Wissenschaft’, unlike the English word ‘science’ in its modern use, does not mean simply the natural and biological sciences—they are, more specifically, ‘Naturwissenschaft’. It means any organized study or body of knowledge, including history, philology, criticism and generally what we call ‘the humanities’, and that is often what Nietzsche has in mind when he uses the word in the text (it is often translated as ‘science’, for want of a brief alternative). But in the title itself there is an idea still broader than this. It translates a phrase, ‘gai saber’, or, as Nietzsche writes on his title page, ‘gaya scienza’, which referred to the art of song cultivated by the medieval troubadours of Provence, and with that, as he explains in Beyond Good and Evil (260), it invokes an aristocratic culture of courtly love. As he made clear, this association comes out in the fact that the book contains poems. But the title has other implications as well. One—particularly important to understanding this book and Nietzsche more generally—is that, just as the troubadours possessed not so much a body of information as an art, so Nietzsche’s ‘gay science’ does not in the first place consist of a doctrine, a theory or body of knowledge. While it involves and encourages hard and rigorous thought, and to this extent the standard implications of ‘Wissenschaft’ are in place, it is meant to convey a certain spirit, one that in relation to understanding and criticism could defy the ‘spirit of gravity’ as lightly as the troubadours, supposedly, celebrated their loves. This is why the original publisher could announce at the beginning of the book that it brought to a conclusion a series of Nietzsche’s writings (including Human, All Too Human and Daybreak) which shared the aim of setting out ‘a new image and ideal of the free spirit’.
He said that it was the most personal of his books, meaning that in part it was explicitly about his own life: some of it is like a diary. It is not irrelevant that the ‘gai saber’ belonged to the south of Europe, to the Mediterranean. Nietzsche spent much of his time in the last years of his working life in Italy (in places such as those he praises in sections 281 and 291), and he was very conscious of the contrast between overcast German earnestness and Southern sun and freedom, an idea which had a long literary history and had been most famously expressed, perhaps, in Goethe’s Italian Journey. That is a recurrent contrast in The Gay Science, but, as so often with Nietzsche, it is not one contrast, and his reflections on the German spirit in philosophy and religion are specially nuanced in this book, for instance in his discussion (357) of ‘What is German?’
Nietzsche’s general reflections, here as elsewhere, have some recurrent weaknesses. There are cranky reflections on diet and climate. His opinions about women and sex, even if they include (as at 71) one or two shrewd and compassionate insights into the conventions of his time, are often shallow and sometimes embarrassing; they were, biographically, the product of an experience which had been drastically limited and disappointing. However, what is most significant for his thought as a whole is the fact that his resources for thinking about modern society and politics, in particular about the modern state, were very thin. The point is not that he was opposed to a free society, equal rights, and other typically modern aspirations (though he certainly was, as section 377, for instance, makes clear). In fact, Nietzsche has by no means been a hero exclusively of the political Right, and many radical, socialist and even feminist groups in the last century found support in his writings.2 This was possible just because the deeply radical spirit of his work was combined with a lack of effective political and social ideas, leaving a blank on which many different aspirations could be projected. His clearly aristocratic sympathies are, in political connections, not so much reactionary as archaic, and while he has many illuminating things to say about the religious and cultural history of Europe, his conception of social relations owes more to his understanding of the ancient world than to a grasp of modernity. The idea of nihilism which is so important in his later works is undeniably relevant to modern conditions, but his discussions of such subjects as ‘corruption’ (in section 23 of this book) borrow a lot from the rhetoric of the Roman Empire and the disposition of its writers to praise the largely imaginary virtues of the vanished Republic.
The Gay Science marks a decisive step beyond the books that came before it because it introduces two of what were to become Nietzsche’s best-known themes, the Death of God and the Eternal Recurrence. The idea that God is dead occurs first at 108, in association with the image of the Buddha’s shadow, still to be seen in a cave for centuries after his death. This is followed at 125 by the haunting story of a madman with a lantern in the bright morning, looking for God. He is met by ridicule, and he concludes that he has ‘come too early’, that the news of God’s death has not yet reached humanity, even though they have killed him themselves. This idea recurs in more literal terms in 343, the first section of Book Five (published, we may recall, five years later). The death of God is identified there as the fact that ‘the belief in . . . God has become unbelievable’: this, ‘the greatest recent event’, is beginning to cast its shadow across Europe. Once this event is fully recognized, it will have incalculable consequences, in particular for European morality. Some of these consequences will be melancholy, and indeed elsewhere Nietzsche struggles with the question of what act of creation, by whom, might overcome the emptiness left by the collapse of traditional illusions. But here the news brings, at least in the short term, only joy, a sense of day-break and freedom, the promise of an open sea: ‘maybe there has never been such an “open sea” ’.
Nietzsche continued to think that the death of God would have vast and catastrophic consequences. But on the account that he himself gave of Christian belief and its origins (in this book and in Beyond Good and Evil, but above all in On the Genealogy of Morality), should he really have thought this? He believed that the faith in the Christian God, and more generally in a reassuring metaphysical structure of the world, was a projection of fear and resentment, representing a victory of the weak over the strong. That metaphysical belief has died; it has been destroyed, as Nietzsche often points out, by itself, by the belief in truthfulness—and we shall come back to that—which was itself part of the metaphysical faith. But how much difference should he expect its death to make? He shares with another nineteenth-century subverter, Marx (with whom he shares little else), the idea that religious belief is a consequence, an expression of social and psychological forces. If those forces remain, and the Christian expression of them collapses, then surely other expressions will take its place. If need secretes thought, and the need remains, then it will secrete new thoughts.
Indeed, Nietzsche does think this: he thinks that liberalism, socialism, Utilitarianism and so on are just secularized expressions of those same forces. But he thinks that they are too manifestly close to the original, and that our growing understanding that the world has no metaphysical structure whatsoever must discredit them as well. The death of God is the death of those gods, too. He has a particular contempt for benign free-thinkers who hope to keep all the ethical content of Christianity without its theology: George Eliot is the unlucky target when the point is spelled out very clearly in The Twilight of the Idols (the section called ‘Expeditions of an Untimely Man’). But that is not the most important point. Even if the content of our morality changes noticeably, as for instance attitudes towards sex have done in recent times, much more basic and structural elements of it, its humanitarianism and its professed belief in equal respect for everyone, are in Nietzsche’s view too bound up with the mechanisms that generated Christianity, and will inevitably go the same way that it has gone. It is too soon, surely, to say that he was wrong.
For Nietzsche himself there was another dimension as well, one immediately connected with his own values. He saw the unravelling of Christianity as part of the phenomenon that he called European nihilism, the loss of any sense of depth or significance to life. The world might conceivably avoid destruction and overt hatred by organizing a pleasantly undemanding and unreflective way of life, a dazed but adequately efficient consumerism. Nietzsche probably did not think that such a society could survive in the long run, but in any case he could not reconcile himself to such a prospect or regard it as anything but loathsome. Contempt was one of his readier emotions, and nothing elicited it more than what he sometimes calls ‘the last man’, the contented, unadventurous, philistine product of such a culture. This book, like all his others, makes it clear that any life worth living must involve daring, individuality and creative bloody-mindedness. This is indeed expressed in the ‘gaiety’ of its title. Gaiety can encompass contentment, as it does on New Year’s Day at the beginning of Book Four, but when that is so, it is a particular achievement and a piece of good luck. Gaiety is not itself contentment, and while it rejects solemnity and the spirit of gravity, it does so precisely because it is the only way of taking life seriously.
Nietzsche has been thought by some people to have had a brutal and ruthless attitude to the world; sometimes, perhaps, he wished that he had. But in fact, one personal feature which, together with his illness and his loneliness, contributed to his outlook was a hyper-sensitivity to suffering. It was linked to a total refusal to forget, not only the existence of suffering, but the fact that suffering was necessary to everything that he and anyone else valued. ‘All good things come from bad things’ is one of his fundamental tenets: it signals his rejection of what he calls ‘the fundamental belief of the metaphysicians, the belief in the opposition of values’ (Beyond Good and Evil, 2). This is, for him, a principle of interpretation, but it presents itself in the first instance simply as a fact, which he thought no honest understanding of the world could evade. If a sense of the world’s achievements and glories—art, self-understanding, nobility of character—cannot in common honesty be separated from the knowledge of the horrors that have been involved in bringing these things about, then there is a question that cannot, Nietzsche supposed, simply be ignored: whether it has all been worth it.
Thinkers in the past have supposed that the question could be answered, and answered positively. Leibniz, with his famous doctrine that this is the best of all possible worlds, believed in a cosmic cost-benefit analysis which would vindicate God’s mysterious management. Hegel had told a progressive metaphysical story of the historical development of freedom and reason, which represented the horrors as all dialectically necessary to the eventual outcome, so that we could be sure that none of them was meaningless. Neither of these fantasies, Nietzsche reasonably thought, could be taken seriously in the late 19th century. Nor, he came to think, could one take altogether seriously someone who answered the same question, but in the negative. In his earlier years he had been very impressed, as Wagner was, by the philosophy of Schopenhauer, and his references to Schopenhauer in this book are mostly respectful (more so than those to Wagner), but he came to be very sceptical about Schopenhauer’s so-called pessimism, which had been expressed in the judgement (for instance) that the world’s ‘non-existence would be preferable to its existence’.3 ‘We take care not to say that the world is worth less’, he says at 346:
The whole attitude of man . . . as judge of the world who finally places existence itself on his scales and finds it too light—the monstrous stupidity of this attitude has finally dawned on us and we are sick of it.
Nietzsche recognizes that his own Birth of Tragedy had been full of the Schopenhauerian spirit. Taken in that spirit, the question of ‘the value of life’, he came to think, had no answer and was indeed not a question. Yet it did not simply go away, because there remained what seemed to Nietzsche, at least, to be a fact, that anyone who really understood and held in his mind the horrors of the world would be crushed or choked by them. That fact left, if not a question to be answered, at least a problem to be overcome. Nietzsche presents the problem, and his way of over-coming it, in the form of the thought-experiment of the Eternal Recurrence, which appears for the first time in The Gay Science.4 In the startling words of 341, what would you think if a demon told you that everything in life would recur over and over again eternally? How would you answer the question ‘Do you want this again and innumerable times again?’? This question, Nietzsche says, ‘would lie on your actions as the heaviest weight’. It tests your ability not to be overcome by the world’s horror and meaninglessness. There is no belief which could ‘justify the world’: confronted with the question of its value, or rather with the replacement for that question, which is the prospect of being crushed by the consciousness of what the world is like, the only issue is (as Nietzsche also puts it) whether one can say ‘yes’ to it, and the test of that is whether seriously and in the fullest consciousness you could will that the course of everything should happen over and over again, including not just its pain and cruelty and humiliation, but also its triviality, emptiness and ugliness, the last man and everything that goes with him.
This is an entirely hypothetical question, a thought-experiment. It is not a matter, as I read him, of Nietzsche’s believing in a theory of eternal recurrence. The idea (which does not occur in Beyond Good and Evil or The Genealogy of Morality) appears in Zarathustra in a form similar to that of The Gay Science, and Nietzsche mentions its importance in The Twilight of the Idols and in Ecce Homo (the intellectual autobiography that he wrote on the verge of insanity). There are some places in which it is treated as a theoretical idea, but they are largely confined to his unpublished notes (his Nachlass), some of which, particularly from his last years, were published in The Will to Power, which is not a book by Nietzsche at all, but a selection from these notes tendentiously put together by his sister.
But if the idea of the Eternal Recurrence is a thought-experiment, how can answering its question lie on our actions ‘as the heaviest weight’? If it is a mere fantasy, then how can ‘willing’ the Eternal Recurrence cost one anything at all? It seems as simple as saying ‘yes’. But one has to re-call that in facing the question one is supposed to have a real and live consciousness of everything that has led to this moment, in particular to what we value. We would have to think in vivid detail, if we could, of every dreadful happening that has been necessary to create Venice, or Newton’s science, or whatever one thinks best of in our morality. Then we would have not simply to say ‘yes’, but to say ‘yes’ and mean it. That does not seem exactly weightless. What perhaps does less work in the thought-experiment is the element, which Nietzsche certainly thought essential to it, of eternity. If there is anything in this test at all, why would willing one recurrence not be enough? If you could overcome the ‘nausea’, as Zarathustra repeatedly puts it, of the prospect that the horrors and the last man and all the rest will come round again even once, and say ‘yes’ to it, you would have taken the essential step: could willing all those further recurrences cost you very much more?
There is another, very natural, reaction to the problem, which is almost everyone’s reaction: to forget about it. One can forget that the horrors exist, and also, if one has a taste for metaphysical consolations, that God is dead. The narrator of Scott Fitzgerald’s The Great Gatsby says of Tom and Daisy that they ‘retreated back into their money and their vast carelessness, or whatever it was that held them together’, and that is, roughly speaking, the remedy that the ‘last man’ finds for Nietzsche’s problem. David Hume spoke of ‘carelessness and inattention’ as the only remedy for sceptical doubts; but that is not the same, because Hume thought that sceptical doubts were unreal. Nietzsche knew that the considerations we all forget were not unreal, and he held obstinately to an idea of truthfulness that would not allow us to falsify them. In this book, he calls on honesty and intellectual conscience at 319 and (as we shall see) at 344; at 284 he speaks of those who have to have an argument against the sceptic inside themselves—‘the great self-dissatisfied people’. In The Anti-Christ (50), at the very end of his active life, he wrote:
Truth has had to be fought for every step of the way, almost everything else dear to our hearts, on which our love and our trust in life depend, has had to be sacrificed to it. Greatness of soul is needed for it, the service of truth is the hardest service.—For what does it mean to be honest in intellectual things? That one is stern towards one’s heart, that one despises ‘fine feelings’, that one makes every Yes and No a question of conscience!
The value of truthfulness embraces the need to find out the truth, to hold on to it, and to tell it—in particular, to oneself. But Nietzsche’s own dedication to this value, he saw, immediately raised the question of what this value is. We have taken it for granted, he thinks, and we have seriously misunderstood it: as he says in Beyond Good and Evil (177), ‘Perhaps nobody yet has been truthful enough about what “truthfulness” is.’
Section 344 of The Gay Science (the second section of Book Five) gives one of Nietzsche’s most important and illuminating statements of this question:
This unconditional will to truth—what is it? Is it the will not to let oneself be deceived? Is it the will not to deceive? For the will to truth could be interpreted in this second way, too—if ‘I do not want to deceive myself’ is included as a special case under the generalization ‘I do not want to deceive’. But why not deceive? But why not allow one-self to be deceived?
The reasons for not wanting to be deceived, he goes on to say, are prudential; seen in that light, wanting to get things right in our intellectual studies and in practical life will be a matter of utility. But those considerations cannot possibly sustain an unconditional value for truth:
much of the time it is more useful to believe falsehoods. Our belief in the unconditional will to truth must have originated in spite of the fact that the disutility and dangerousness of ‘the will to truth’ or ‘truth at any price’ is proved to it constantly. ‘At any price’: we understand this well enough once we have offered and slaughtered one faith after another on this altar! Consequently, ‘will to truth’ does not mean ‘I do not want to let myself be deceived’ but—there is no alternative—‘I will not deceive, not even myself ’; and with that we stand on moral ground.
. . . you will have gathered what I am getting at, namely, that it is still a metaphysical faith upon which our faith in science rests—that even we knowers of today, we godless anti-metaphysicians, still take our fire, too, from the flame lit by the thousand-year-old faith, the Christian faith which was also Plato’s faith, that God is truth; that truth is divine . . .
The title of the section is ‘In what way we, too, are still pious’. The idea is developed further in Book III of On the Genealogy of Morality, where the ‘ascetic ideal’ which has received an unflattering genealogical explanation is discovered to lie at the root of the will to truth, which powered the need to discover that very explanation. But that does not overthrow the will to truth: ‘I have every respect for the ascetic ideal in so far as it is honest!’ (III. 26).
The ‘unconditional will to truth’ does not mean that we want to believe any and every truth. It does mean that we want to understand who we are, to correct error, to avoid deceiving ourselves, to get beyond comfortable falsehood. The value of truthfulness, so understood, cannot lie just in its consequences, as Nietzsche repeatedly points out. Earlier in this book (121), he says that various beliefs may be necessary for our life, but that does not show them to be true: ‘life is not an argument’. Already in Human, All Too Human (517) he had noted: ‘Fundamental In-sight: There is no pre-established harmony between the furthering of truth and the well-being of humanity.’ Again, in Beyond Good and Evil (II) he says that we must understand that there are some judgements which ‘must be believed to be true, for the sake of preservation of creatures like ourselves, though they might, of course, be false judgements for all that’.
Truth may be not just unhelpful, but destructive. In particular the truths of Nietzsche’s own philosophy, which discredit the metaphysical world, can (as we have seen) destructively lead to nihilism if they come to be accepted. In the Nachlass (The Will to Power 5) there is a revealing note, which mentions the way in which the idea of truthfulness has turned against the morality which fostered it, and ends with the remark:
This antagonism—not to esteem what we know, and not to be allowed any longer to esteem the lies we should like to tell ourselves—results in a process of dissolution.
In what ways are we ‘not allowed’ to esteem these lies? To some degree, Nietzsche thought that this was already in his time a historical or social necessity: that, at least among thoughtful people, these beliefs simply could not stand up much longer or have much life to them. It is a good question whether this was right, indeed whether it is right today—particularly when we recall the secularized, political, forms which are now taken, as Nietzsche supposed, by the same illusions. What is certainly true is that Nietzsche took it to be an ethical necessity, for himself and anyone he was disposed to respect, not to esteem these illusions. He did think that there were things which, even for honest and reflective people, could rightly compensate in some ways for the loss of the illusions; it is in this spirit that he remarks elsewhere in the Nachlass (The Will to Power 822) ‘We possess art lest we perish of the truth.’ He does not mean that we possess art in place of the truth; he means that we possess art so that we can possess the truth and not perish of it.
There continue to be complex debates about what Nietzsche understood truth to be. Quite certainly, he did not think, in pragmatist spirit, that beliefs are true if they serve our interests or welfare: we have already seen some of his repeated denials of this idea. A more recently fashionable view of him is that he shared, perhaps founded, a kind of deconstructive scepticism to the effect that there is no such thing as truth, or that truth is what anyone thinks it is, or that it is a boring category that we can do without. This is also wrong, and more deeply so. As we have seen, Nietzsche did not think that the ideal of truthfulness went into retirement when its metaphysical origins were discovered, and he did not suppose, either, that truthfulness could be detached from a concern for the truth. Truthfulness as an ideal retains its power, and so far from truth being dispensable or malleable, his main question is how it can be made bearable. Repeatedly Nietzsche—the ‘old philologist’, as he called himself—reminds us that, quite apart from any question about philosophical interpretations, including his own, there are facts to be respected. In The Anti-Christ (59) he praises the ancient world for having invented ‘the incomparable art of reading well, the prerequisite for all systematic knowledge’, and with that ‘the sense for facts, the last-developed and most valuable of all the senses’. At the beginning of On the Genealogy of Morality, he tells us that ‘the English psychologists’ should not be dismissed as old, cold, boring frogs; rather, they are brave animals,
who have been taught to sacrifice desirability to truth, every truth, even a plain, bitter, ugly, foul, unchristian, immoral truth . . . Because there are such truths—
He keenly detects elements in our intellectual structures which we mistake for truths. In The Gay Science he stresses the importance of ‘a law of agreement’, which regulates people’s thoughts and provides intellectual security (76). He stresses the historical, indeed the continuing, importance of these conceptions, but he does not think that they are the truth, or that they are immune to the discovery of truth. They are contrasted with the truth, and the question is, what will emerge from a battle between them and a growing awareness of the truth: as he asks at 110, ‘to what extent can truth stand to be incorporated?’
In his earliest writings about truth and error, Nietzsche sometimes spoke as though he could compare the entire structure of our thought to the ‘real’ nature of things and find our thought defective. It is as though the business of using concepts at all falsified a reality which in itself was—what? Formless, perhaps, or chaotic, or utterly unstructured. Later, he rightly rejected this picture, with its implication that we can somehow look round the edge of our concepts at the world to which we are applying them and grasp it as entirely unaffected by any descriptions (including, we would be forced to admit, the descriptions ‘formless’, ‘chaotic’, and so on).5 There are passages in The Gay Science where it is unclear whether he is still attached to this picture. He discusses fictions, the practice of regarding things as equal or identical or mathematically structured when they are not so or only approximately so (110, 121). He is making the point, certainly, that mathematical representations which are offered by the sciences are in various ways idealizations, and this is entirely intelligible. There is greater ambiguity when he suggests that nothing is really ‘identical’ or ‘the same’. To take an example: the concept ‘snake’ allows us to classify various individual things as ‘the same animal’, and to recognize one individual thing as ‘the same snake’. It is trivially true that ‘snake’ is a human concept, a cultural product. But it is a much murkier proposition that its use somehow falsifies reality—that ‘in itself ’ the world does not contain snakes, or indeed anything else you might mention. Nietzsche came to see that this idea of the world ‘in itself ’ was precisely a relic of the kind of metaphysics that he wanted to overcome. As a remark in the Nachlass puts it (The Will to Power 567):‘The antithesis of the apparent world and the true world is reduced to the antithesis “world” and “nothing”.’
It is less than clear, and also well worth considering, how far the formulations of The Gay Science still commit him to the murky metaphysical picture. Some of the same problems affect another idea which appears in the book, and which was to be important in works he wrote after it, the idea of ‘a perspective’. Our interpretative outlook, our particular ‘take’ on the world, is modelled on the analogy of a literal, visual, perspective, and this analogy has two implications: that we understand that there can be alternative perspectives, and, importantly, that these will be alternative perspectives on the same reality. In later works, Nietzsche is often less than definite about what is involved in this second implication, but he is very clear about the first implication, and indeed urges us to combine perspectives, or move between them, which shows that we not only know that there are other perspectival views, but that we know what some of them are. In The Gay Science, he seems on the very edge of stepping into this problem. Section 299, for instance, suggests that we can make use of different perspectives. But at 374, where he says ‘we cannot reject the possibility that it [the world] includes infinite interpretations’, the idea of the ‘alternatives’ seems to remain an entirely abstract possibility: ‘we cannot look around our corner’.
The ‘Greeks were superficial—out of profundity’, he says in the Preface (and he repeated the remark later, in the epilogue to Nietzsche contra Wagner). But the Greeks in their time could straightforwardly display a delight in surfaces and appearances which was indeed profound. That is not possible for us, after so much history: any such attitude for us will be a different and more sophisticated thing, and it will represent an achievement. At the very end of the book, he returns to the gaiety of the gay science, and calls up the ideal of ‘a spirit that plays naively, i.e. not deliberately but from overflowing abundance and power, with everything that was hitherto called holy, good, untouchable, divine . . .’ This might seem even inhuman in comparison to conventional forms of seriousness, that is to say, solemnity,
and in spite of all this, it is perhaps only with it that the great seriousness really emerges; that the real question mark is posed for the first time; that the destiny of the soul changes; the hand of the clock moves forward . . .
Then he adds, at the end of that section, ‘. . . the tragedy begins.’ But immediately there comes the last section of all, Epilogue, in which the spirits of his own book tell him to stop these gloomy noises, these ‘voices from the crypt, and marmot whistles’. ‘Nichtsolche Töne!’ they cry in an echo of Schiller’s Ode to Joy, ‘Not such sounds!’ He says he will give them something else—the poems, presumably, with which he ends the book. But he does so with a final question, and it is a question which he wanted his readers to ask themselves not just at the end of this book, but throughout it and indeed throughout all his books—‘Is that what you want?’
1 References to The Gay Science, and to other works by Nietzsche, are to numbered sections.
2 A very interesting study in this connection is Steven E. Ascheim, The Nietzsche Legacy in Germany 1890–1990 (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1992). A helpful discussion of Nietzsche’s political thought is Bruce Detwiler, Nietzsche and the Politics of Aristocratic Radicalism (University of Chicago Press, 1990). Mark Warren, in Nietzsche and Political Thought (Boston: MIT Press, 1988), well brings out the limitations of Nietzsche’s social ideas, but is over-optimistic in thinking that if his philosophy were true to itself, it would offer a basis for liberalism.
3 The World as Will and Representation, trans. E.F.J. Payne (2 vols., New York: Dover, 1969), vol. II, chapter 46, p. 576.
4 The phrase ‘eternal recurrence’ occurs first at 285, but in a more limited connection, of recognizing that there is no perpetual peace, but only (as the pre-Socratic philosopher Heraclitus taught) a cycle of war and peace.
5 This is well argued by Maudemarie Clark, Nietzsche on Truth and Philosophy (Cambridge University Press, 1991).
TWENTY-TWO
“There are many kinds of eyes”
“There are many kinds of eyes”, he says in the Nachlass [WP (The Will to Power)540](1885); “Even the sphinx has eyes—and consequently there are many kinds of ‘truths’, and consequently there is no truth.” Here “there is no truth” can mean that there is no one truth, and that is one thing that he means. But in another, and significant, remark from the Nachlass [WP 616](1885/6), the same phrase reappears in the company of what seems to be an uneasy suggestion that there both is and is not something that is being falsified by all these views of it:
That the value of the world lies in our interpretation (that interpretations other than merely human ones are perhaps somewhere possible—); that previous interpretations have been perspectival valuations by virtue of which we can survive in life, i.e. in the will to power, for the growth of power; that every elevation of man brings with it the overcoming of narrower interpretations; that every strengthening and increase of power opens up new perspectives and means believing in new horizons—this idea permeates my writings. The world with which we are concerned is false, i.e. is not a fact but a fable and approximation on the basis of a meagre sum of observations; it is ‘in flux’, as something in a state of becoming, as a falsehood always changing but never getting near the truth—for there is no ‘truth’.
“The world with which we are concerned”: there is a question of quite what this means, a question that can come up as a question of translation. Cf BGE (Beyond Good and Evil) 34: “Why couldn’t the world that concerns us be a fiction?”—(“die Welt, dieuns et was angeht”), which is near to “so far as we have anything to do with it” or “it is our business.”
There is, once again, certainly something awkward in putting together the idea that all these interpretations are false, that the world which they variously construct is a fable or, again, an approximation, with the idea that there is nothing for them to falsify or to approximate to. But we should read these words in the light of what comes before them. It is clear, first, that we should hold on to the first implication of the idea of a perspective that I mentioned before, that we can recognize that there are many perspectives, and know what some of them are. Nietzsche’s idea of an interpretation or perspective is not transcendental in anything like the Kantian sense—in a sense, that is to say, in which it provided the form of anything that we could regard as experience. If our perspective were such a thing, we could not have the idea of there being more than one of them, and then, as Donald Davidson has rightly argued, we could not have the idea of there being even one of them. Nietzsche is concerned with a recognizable multiplicity of perspectives, and that implies a multiplicity of recognizable perspectives.
A perspective or interpretation here is a large-scale world-view or system of values, something in virtue of which we or others can survive in life. We know about some of them, and those we can compare, not indeed with a true world of values which could be grasped independently of anyone’s perspective, but at least with each other and with our own. There can be indefinitely many such outlooks. In many cases we can grasp them only as abstract possibilities, and cannot grasp what they might contain. They might belong, as Nietzsche suggested in the passage just quoted, to creatures who were not even human. In their case, we would have only the most limited and utterly abstract grasp on the idea that their outlook, as we have to call it if we are to sustain the idea at all, is trying to do the same kind of thing as our own. But it would have to imply this much at least, that they had a conscious and in some degree reflective social life, which required them to make sense of their circumstances. We have very little grasp on what such a life might be, except by thinking of it in human terms (as the thin fantasies of science fiction repeatedly make clear). Much more important, though, for Nietzsche and for us, is that there are human perspectives and interpretations which we can only poorly grasp. No doubt some of them lie in the past, and our inability to grasp them is a matter of ignorance and a failure of understanding. But this is a contingent matter: Nietzsche thinks that there are past outlooks into which we do have insight, such as those of the ancient Greeks. What really concerns him are outlooks which are beyond us because they are ahead of us and lie in the future.
As he often says, much of Nietzsche’s philosophy, including his critiques of the past and the present, is in the interest of the future.
[NB the subtitle of BGE: Vorspiel einer Philosophie der Zukunft. Does that mean: a philosophy which is about, or is concerned with, the future (which is how Alexander Nehamas reads it)? Or does it mean: a philosophy that will come about in the future? The double Wagnerian echo surely suggests the latter.]
And who will do the creating? Nietzsche did not have much conception of politics. He had some political opinions, of an aristocratic character; he had a well-known dislike of socialism, liberalism, equality, democracy and so on. But as Mark Warren has well argued, he had not the faintest idea of the nature of a modern state.1 His general political conceptions, such as they were, were largely drawn from the ancient world and were not so much reactionary as archaic. Indeed, he had a poor sense not just of the modern state but of a modern society: it might even be said, of any society at all. He was supported in this by a tendency, presumably derived from German Idealism, to move freely between social and historical categories on the one hand, and psychological categories on the other: GM (The Genealogy of Morality) itself is a puzzling exercise in this. However that may be, his models of overcoming and transforming our values, which is his most enduring concern, tend to be personal, individualistic, occasionally heroic. Often the undertaking is regarded as an expression simply of a personal endeavour, like that of an artist; sometimes it takes on an historically transformative note, as though the individual’s feat of transvaluation will itself change society. With regard to “creating new names”, he leaves us for the most part with an image of some solitary figure bringing new values into existence, an image which, brought into relation to a transformation of society, is bound to have a certain pathos about it.
The question is not whether Nietzsche’s ideals for a transformed society, to the extent that he had any, are something that we are likely to accept. The point is that this individualistic or artistic way of conceiving creation through destruction, particularly when it is applied to social transformation, is not true to much else that Nietzsche believed. It implies an heroic transcendence of social and historical conditions by the creator, and this belies one of his thoughts: we do not make our thoughts out of nothing; they come in part from what is around us, and we have a very poor grasp, for the most part, of what their source may be. It also implies, if dimly, that society might be transformed, not just by such an heroic creation, but in the very terms that the creator invented, and this belies another of his thoughts: what ideas actually do is not under the control of their creators, and is rarely what their creators intend. Their ideas may help to shape other people’s aims, but they are more deeply at the mercy of those other people’s needs, and of opaque historical contingency.
Thoughts of this kind underlie Nietzsche’s use of the idea that new perspectives and new interpretations involve an increase in power. It is not—and this is vitally important—that an increase in power can serve as a criterion of what interpretation or outlook we should adopt. We do not survey a range of perspectives or sets of values and choose one by considering the extent to which it will increase our power. There is a memorable sentence in the Nachlass: “Das Kriterium der Wahrheit liegt in der Steigerung des Machtgefühls [The criterion of truth lies in the increase of one’s sense of power]” [WP 534 (1887/8)]. This contains two errors: that this could be the way to express relations between truth and power, and also—perhaps more significantly—that an increase in power, in a sense adequate to Nietzsche’s purposes, could be the criterion of anything.
There is more than one reason why this must be a mistake. One is that, as I just said, we cannot adequately imagine or understand a new perspective or interpretation, in this very broad sense, until it has come about. Another is that we cannot anticipate its power: indeed, we cannot understand in advance what kind of power it will create, what new forms of life it will make possible, or how those forms of life could express human vitality—just as the ancients could not have foreseen the distinctive shape of that world the creation of which GM claims to describe, a world centered on Christianity; nor could they have understood how that utterly strange thing could come to represent a new way of giving life a meaning. Hegel already saw that all such things can only be understood backwards, but Hegel believed that we can see behind us because we are higher on the historical mountain of progressive freedom and reason. Nietzsche precisely does not believe this, but for him, all the more, there is no way in which, in these fundamental respects, the understanding of life can get ahead of life itself. There is a marvellous line of Goethe’s Faust, which is quoted more than once by Wittgenstein: “Im Anfang war die Tat [In the beginning was the deed]”. It is never, so far as I know, quoted by Nietzsche, but it might well have been.
I have said that Nietzsche basically overcame the temptation to try to look round the side of our representations of the world and say that they were all false in relation to the undescribed world at the other end of the comparison. In this sense, I believe, he overcame metaphysics. But, at the same time, I think we can see why he could still feel the pull of saying, as he does in various remarks I have mentioned, both that our interpretations are all untrue, and that there is nothing for them to be untrue to. He is thinking here, as I have said, of large-scale interpretations of the world and value-systems that go with them. These interpretations include historical narrations which help us to make sense of those values—accounts of how human beings came to be where they are now: an account for instance of Enlightenment, moral progress, the rise of modern ideas of freedom. These stories carry with them, or have done so up to now, a demand for closure, embodied in the two ideas that there is one true set of values to which we are, with luck, moving closer, and that there is one correct narrative of how we came to be where we are.
This yields a tension or conflict. On the one hand it seems that we must have some such ideas if these values, this perspective, are to be ours at all. On the other hand, knowledge of our history and an understanding of human activities grasped from that history, tell us at a reflective level that these claims to closure are not true. Nietzsche is nothing if not reflective: he represents reflection carried to the point at which he recognizes that reflection itself and the self-consciousness of modernity can weaken or destroy the power to live confidently. In this respect, as he also knew, he is in a battle with his own philosophy.
He succeeded, or perhaps we should say, he is now in the process of succeeding, in seeing what a world of new values would be like, Im An-fang war die Tat—and when he said [TI (Twilight of the Idols)] that he philosophized with a hammer, he meant, as he said, that he was testing the wheels, not building a new vehicle. It is not just a question of whether we can foresee a world beyond ours. There is also a question of why we should recognize it as an improvement, as a higher alternative to the life we have. The power it will embody will not reveal itself as recommending it until it is a power that someone already possesses.
Nietzsche was in fact keener in some ways on laying out the qualities of people who might make a new interpretation, create new names, than he was on the impossible task of laying out the content of a future interpretation. Central to those qualities was indeed truthfulness: a truthfulness that respects truths which, as we saw, he is prepared to call “facts”—truths which remain true even though there is no “one truth”about what can give human life a meaning—truths which are indeed what show that there is no such one truth. Why is this quality so important to him?
One reason lies in the other implication, which I mentioned earlier, of the perspective metaphor: that these perspectives are interpretations or views of one reality. They cannot be various views of the “one truth”about human life, of the reality which does not exist. What they are, however—and I leave aside the extra-terrestrial possibilities—are all views of human life, and that is identified through a whole set of truths, including, very significantly, truths of history. Moreover, it is only those “plain, bitter, ugly, foul, unchristian, immoral” truths that can make us understand where we are now, and what our problem is.
But doesn’t that mean that there is one narrative that Nietzsche has to regard as correct, or correct as far as it goes: the narrative of how the old illusions died, the narrative, as he might put it, of God’s death? What we might call: the negative narrative of Enlightenment. I think the answer to that question has to be “yes”. But do we need to hold on to that narrative? Some of us would be more disposed than Nietzsche was to say that, unless we face the world truthfully, any hope for a better politics will be doomed. That is not an entirely instrumentalist answer, because we have to believe in truthfulness in itself if we are to hold on to those truths:here as so often, intrinsic values have their uses. But it does imply that it is not just at a technical level that we need to understand the world if we are to make a difference to it which we might recognize as an improvement. Moreover, it is a condition of our understanding the future as in a sense our future: it will not be us, but surely we must think of it as the life of people bound to us by the continuation of that narrative. We might think, too, that this understanding that the old metaphysical picture of the world was a fiction is one thing, at least, that has been achieved by all this suffering, and it would be pitiful if it were to be thrown away.
But Nietzsche will certainly remind us that if it needs to be thrown away, then it will be. Perhaps people will come to forget all this, and live under some new conception of the “one truth”, some new illusions. Or perhaps they will not have such a picture, nor know that they do not, nor remember that people once did and then lost it: they will not have any need to believe in any meaning to life at all. The last man will take over the world. Then that is what will have happened. To many of us, as to Nietzsche himself, that would be a final falling away. But here we do find ourselves, with him, on moral ground. Like Wittgenstein and freewill.
1 Mark Warren, Nietzsche and Political Thought (Cambridge, Mass., 1988).
TWENTY-THREE
Unbearable Suffering
Nietzsche wrote:
Was eigentlich gegen das Leiden empört, ist nicht das Leiden an sich, sondern das Sinnlose des Leidens. [What actually arouses indignation over suffering is not the suffering itself, but the senselessness of suffering.]
And again:
[Der Mensch] litt am Probleme seines Sinns. Er litt auch sonst, er war in der Hauptsache ein krankhaftes Tier: aber nicht das Leiden selbst war sein Problem, sondern dass die Antwort fehlte für den Schrei der Frage “wozu leiden?” Der Mensch, das tapferste und leidgewohnteste Tier, verneint an sich nicht das Leiden: er will es, er sucht es selbst auf, vorausgesetzt, dass man ihm einen Sinn dafür aufzeigt, ein Dazu des Leidens. Die Sinnlosigkeit des Leidens, nicht das Leiden, war der Fluch, der bisher über der Menschheit ausgebreitet lag.1 [[Man] suffered from the problem of what he meant. Other things made him suffer too, in the main he was a sickly animal: but suffering itself was not his problem, but the fact that there was no answer to the question he screamed, “Suffering for what?” Man, the bravest animal and most prone to suffer, does not deny suffering as such: he wills it, he even seeks it out, provided he is shown a meaning for it, a purpose of suffering. The meaningless of suffering, not the suffering, was the curse which has so far blanketed mankind.]
Of course this is not just Nietzsche’s thought: in various forms, it has been a recurrent idea in Western philosophy. I shall not try to sketch any of that history, or to place the idea in the context of Nietzsche’s thought, but, as with many other questions, I do want to start from Nietzsche. I find the leading edge of these problems in his understanding of what they were, and also in his foresight of what they would come to be—and, to some extent, of what they would cease to be.
I am particularly concerned with two questions raised by these texts.
First, what is “Sinn” or the lack of it? What is missing when people encounter “das Sinnlose des Leidens”? Does “Sinn” necessarily imply a purpose, as might be suggested by “ein Dazu des Leidens”? What kinds of purpose? Or could “Sinn” imply no more than an explanation or cause of suffering?
Second, what is it that you can do with suffering if it has “Sinn”, a meaning, and cannot do if it has not? Throughout this paper, as its title implies, I shall describe what you can supposedly do with meaningful suffering as “bearing” it, but it is important that this is simply a label. The question is, what relevantly counts as “bearing” it? In the second of the passages I have quoted, Nietzsche says that man “verneint an sich nicht das Leiden”—he does not “repudiate” it, as the English translators put it: he does not say ‘no’ to it, or reject it. One might say that he accepts it. But what is it to do this?
In the same work, Nietzsche says:
Jeder Leidende nämlich sucht instinktiv zu seinem Leid eine Ursache; genauer noch, einen Täter, noch bestimmter, einen für Leid empfänglichen schuldigen Täter.2 [[E]very sufferer instinctively looks for a cause of his distress; more exactly, for a culprit, even more precisely for a guilty culprit who is receptive to distress.]
This is the well-known operation of ressentiment. This process gives, in a way, a meaning to suffering, namely a cause or explanation of it, but by itself it does not make it any easier to bear. In particular, it does not reduce in any way the reaction of indignation, which is naturally implied by “empört” in the first quotation I gave. On the contrary: finding a blameworthy cause of one’s suffering precisely provides an object for indignation. What may bring some relief to the suffering is the further elaboration of ressentiment which lies in the fantasy punishment of the agent cause. Inasmuch as this process makes suffering more bearable, it is this further meaning, the fantasy of revenge or retribution, that does so. Mere recognition of a cause, in particular an agent cause, cannot do this; if anything, it makes the suffering worse. This is very obvious when the “unbearable” quality of the suffering is experienced precisely through reactions of indignation or resentment.
Nietzsche also says, and in the same place as that first quotation:
Aber weder für den Christen, der in das Leiden eine ganze geheime Heils-Maschinerei hineininterpretirt hat, noch für den naiven Menschen älterer Zeiten, der alles Leiden sich in Hinsicht auf Zuschauer oder auf Leiden-Macher auszulegen verstand, gab es überhaupt ein solches sinnloses Leiden. [[B]ut neither for the Christian, who saw in suffering a whole, hidden machinery of salvation, nor for naïve man in ancient times, who saw all suffering in relation to spectators or to instigators of suffering, was there any such senseless suffering.]
and also:
“Jedes Übel ist gerechtfertigt, an dessen Anblick ein Gott sich erbaut”:so klang die vorzeitliche Logik des Gefühls—und wirklich, war es nur die vorzeitliche? [“All evil is justified if a god takes pleasure in it”: so ran the primitive logic of feeling—and was this logic really restricted to primitive times?]
Here suffering might seem to get its meaning from a divine purpose—or we might say, more precisely, from a purpose that involves a divine interest. It cannot be enough, however, to give suffering a meaning for the sufferer—in a sense that makes it more bearable for him—merely that some purpose or other is served by the suffering: for instance, as we have already seen, if my suffering serves the purpose of some other and hostile agent, this merely makes things worse for me. The most obvious contrast with my suffering’s serving someone else’s purpose is that it should serve my purpose, but the possibility that a divine purpose should make sense of my suffering shows that this in itself is too simple. What gives my suffering a meaning for me need not be directly my own purpose, but rather a purpose that I acknowledge, or which has authority over me, or is, in some way, a purpose for me.
It is a quite complex question, what it is for a purpose to fill this role. The case of primitive religion that Nietzsche discusses shows that it need not be a matter of conscious thought or reflection. At that level, people may simply be “taking for granted” (or something implying even less conscious acknowledgement than that) that there are powers or purposes over them. The situation changes if the believers are taken to be more reflective than this. But if they are, relevantly, more reflective, we must not assume that the effect must be that the purpose is one which they reflectively choose to acknowledge as having authority over them. To make that assumption is to accept a Kantian ideal of autonomy, and with it a dichotomy between the will and the understanding, which in these connexions is mistaken: neither in the case of finding explanations, nor in considering what to do, can one choose what makes sense to one.
So far, then, we have one relevant sense in which suffering might have a meaning: that it has an appropriate relation to a purpose that has authority for the sufferer. We shall come back to that formula, but let us first turn in the direction of the second question that I identified: what is it for suffering, when it has a meaning, to be (as I put it) “bearable”?
The first thing that must be said and never forgotten throughout the discussion is that some suffering simply is unbearable. It can break people. This is true of physical pain, as is well known to torturers and to those who send agents into the risk of being tortured. Suffering may be such that, even when you are utterly identified with the purpose for which you are suffering, you would give anything for it to end. The same can be true of such things as losing a child in a struggle in which, once again, one thoroughly believes. The idea that meaning, or purpose, or understanding, or even, perhaps, a true philosophy could make all suffering bearable is a lie, whether it is told by by recruiting sergeants or by ancient sages. Our question is confined to a limited class of cases, in which what one thinks or believes or takes for granted may make a difference to one’s being broken or not.
If there is a space in which one may bear the suffering or find it un-bearable, what will the difference between these two things be? I do not think that the thought we are looking for is best caught by saying that if, in such a case, the suffering has a meaning, this makes it less painful—that “meaning” is an analgesic. There are some cases in which something like this is true, such as the cases of intense and purposeful activity in a battle. (“By God, Sir, ” the Duke is said to have said to his fellow officer, “your leg has gone”; “By God, Sir, ” he replied, “it has”.) If people sustain better the deprivations of a siege when they see a point in doing so, this means in part that they suffer less from it. But pharmacology is an empirical science, and, to the extent that meaning is an analgesic for a given kind of suffering, this will be a matter basically of contingent fact. This need not imply that, in such cases, meaning can be offered straight-forwardly as a recipe for a cure: there may be some meanings (such as the fantasies of ressentiment) that can operate on suffering only unconsciously. But the analgesic model does imply that, with some kinds of suffering, looking for an analgesic can usefully take the form of looking for meaning, and this cannot be right, above all because I cannot choose what will make sense to me.
This is so even in the simplest possible case, in which an action makes sense to an agent because he has chosen to do it in the light of reasons that he has.3 Even in this case, although I choose the action, I do not choose that it make sense to me: that is a matter of my reasons, my desires, my on-going projects, and I do not choose all of them.4 The pharmacological model fails, because the “meaning” cannot be seen in a therapeutic light, simply as an efficient cause of making suffering more bearable, in particular by diminishing it. The suffering, rather, becomes a different thing because the experience of it is structured by the meaning, and if this is so, while there may be some sense in which the suffering becomes less because it is bearable, this is not really the main point.
So what is the relation between suffering and meaning, in virtue of which suffering that has a meaning may be more bearable? We cannot merely say that suffering can become bearable if it makes sense to the sufferer or is a necessary part or consequence of what makes sense to him. One reason for this we have already seen. The suffering may make sense to him just because it is explicable or has an intelligible cause, and simply knowing the cause, as in the case of the agent who arouses ressentiment, does not make the suffering bearable. Similarly if we know the causation of the plague, this does not make the incidence of the plague any more bearable, except in the sense that it may help one to control it so that there is less suffering. There can be confusion here because in traditional discussions of these questions an explanation was often taken to be a teleological explanation. But if that kind of explanation supposedly yielded meaning in the relevant sense, this was not just because it was an explanation, but because it introduced a purpose, and not merely someone’s arbitrary purpose, but rather one that was the purpose of the universe (or something like that), and so was supposed to have authority for everyone insofar as they were rational.
Leaving aside, now, divine or cosmic purposes, we should look more closely at the cases in which a purpose has authority for the sufferer because it is involved in a project that expresses a purpose of the sufferer’s own. It is indeed important that it should have authority, and it is not enough for this that it should simply be some purpose or other of the agent’s. It might be an arbitrary purpose, a merely chosen goal, and his identification with it might be very brief or superficial. It might be, at the limit, no more than his purpose in a given action. This may be enough to make (limited) sense of the agent’s action, but it is not enough to make sense of his suffering; if it is to do that, the purpose will have to make sense to him in some larger context of life. Some creative undertaking, or relationship, or commitment to a political cause may work like this. Call such a thing, just as a label, a project of that person: for the person who has the project, it makes sense of his life or of part of his life. Suffering that is involved as a necessary means or constituent of such a project will make sense of the suffering, and that indeed can make it more bearable (always within the limits, that some suffering just is unbearable). As I said before, it may not in a simple sense act as an analgesic. But there is the important difference between there being and there not being a meaning, that when the suffering is meaningless, there is no thought associated with the awfulness except the intense desire that it should stop, while this cannot be the only thought when there is a meaning, because one wants, and very seriously so, the success of the project in which the suffering is involved, and a realistic hold on the world in which the project is being expressed can help one to hold on to that thought.
Some may think that these formulations are excessively goal-directed. Various traditional counsels have suggested that the way to make life bearable lies in the direction of ataraxia, the refusal of identifications and projects (except, of course, that project itself). But this line of thought in fact represents a different idea. Indeed, one might say that it belongs to a different world. It is not making a suggestion, opposed to Nietzsche’s, about what might make suffering bearable, namely that it should be meaningless rather than meaningful: rather, it is suggesting a way of reducing suffering altogether, through not caring about contingencies and attachments. It is, in its simplest form, an analgesic recipe. Moreover, to the extent that such an undertaking does connect to the line of thought I have been exploring, it is not contrary to it. For what is the sage who is dedicated to ataraxia going to make of the sufferings that he cannot avoid? What will help him to bear them with equanimity is not the blankly negative idea that they are meaningless. What will help him, rather, is the idea, so far as he can keep it going, that they are unimportant, and this implies that something else is more important: notably, the conception of the self as something to which attachments and contingencies, even the contingency of its own existence, are indifferent. This conception itself is not going to be empty or purely formal, but will be supported by some further idea, for instance that the self expresses itself most appropriately by being at one with unchanging necessities. If such an idea helps to make suffering bearable, it does so by indeed providing meaning, if not to suffering itself, to a life that contains such suffering as one cannot oneself eliminate from it. In this connection, as in others, the familiar consideration that ridding oneself of projects is itself a project offers a lot more than a purely dialectical point.
If suffering can be made bearable by a project that makes sense of it, what is to be made of cases in which such a project does not succeed? The first thing to say is that there are ways of not succeeding other than, in the narrowest sense, failing. In discussing elsewhere the imaginary or at least highly schematized case of an artist (I called him Gauguin) who threw up his existing life and commitments to develop his painting, I distinguished two ways in which such a project might come to nothing. It might never really be put to the test: thus Gauguin might have fallen ill and died on the way to Tahiti. Alternatively, it might be put to the test and fail, as it would have done if Gauguin did everything he might do to develop his work but in the end neither he nor anyone else thought that it was worth much. In that case, one might say that his project had been refuted, while in the first case it had merely been negated.
In which of these cases, we can rather ingenuously ask, would his suffering be more bearable? If it is meaning that makes suffering more bearable, then (assuming of course that he is conscious of the negation) it looks as though the case of negation should be the more unbearable, because the suffering that he experiences if he is aware that his project has been irreversibly stalled is not related to that project in a way that makes sense of the suffering. Suffering in the course of a life that makes sense does not itself necessarily make sense, and there could be a special bitterness in the absurdity of his having thrown up everything for the sake of a venture which came to a halt in this meaningless way. By contrast, suffering associated with the refutation of his project does seem to make sense, in precisely the terms in which the project itself made sense—the answer “no” is, after all, an answer to the original question. Yet surely the suffering brought about by definitive failure, by refutation, might be harder to bear? The clear sense that he destroyed his earlier life and commitments for something that was firmly shown to be an illusion could readily be more painful than the sense that, after all, he was never to know.
Looked at in this way, the connexion between meaning, and the suffering’s being bearable, might seem to be the wrong way round. But I do not really think that this is so. The suffering of the person whose project is refuted has meaning only in the inadequate sense that it has an explanation which is provided by the failure of the project. This does not imply that his life now has a meaning—it was precisely the meaning of his life (we are assuming) that was destroyed in the refutation of the project. Yet it is now that he is suffering. A person, by contrast, whose project is merely negated, for whom it disappears through an external contingency, may sustain an image of how things might have been otherwise and with that, perhaps, the idea that his life to this point made at least some sense in having been directed to this purpose. The person whose project has been refuted may of course be sustained by a hope that something else may take its place, but then it will be quite another project, the search for a replacement, that will be giving his life some meaning.
In neither of these cases, or in any other, is philosophy telling people what they should feel. (It is amazing in how many ways it has tried, and still tries, to do so.) Rather, in reflecting on such cases we may see how we can use Nietzsche’s thought the other way round: imagining someone who suffers for such reasons and bears it, we can ask what new sense it is that his life is now finding for itself.
1 Zur Genealogie der Moral, II 7, III 28.
2 III 15.
3 It is worth saying, perhaps, that “in the light of reasons that he has” is not redundant: people can choose to do things that do not make sense to them at all.
4 I discuss the idea of events, processes and actions “making sense” to people, and argue for the unity of the idea over the agent’s and the interpreter’s perspectives, in Truth and Truthfulness [Princeton U.P., 2002], chapter 10, section 1.
5 “Moral Luck”, in the book with that title [Cambridge University Press, 1981]; see in particular p. 27.
R. G. COLLINGWOOD
TWENTY-FOUR
An Essay on Collingwood
THREE REASONS FOR TALKING ABOUT COLLINGWOOD
My first reason for discussing R. G. Collingwood is to right, in a small way, a genuine injustice, and a disservice to the history of Oxford philosophy, which consists in the virtual obliteration of him from the collective local consciousness. In a book which appeared in 1958 entitled English Philosophy since 1900, 1 there is no reference to Collingwood at all.
Second, he differed in his whole approach to philosophy from his contemporaries: the pupils of Cook Wilson (as he was himself) and others, whom Collingwood called “the realists”, such as Prichard, Joseph, and, in Cambridge, Moore. He represented himself in his Autobiography (1939) as very isolated from them, and indeed rejected by them. It has been suggested by David Boucher, in a useful biographical essay, 2 that Collingwood somewhat exaggerated this. Certainly any isolation can only have been increased by the Autobiography itself, which is a fascinating and often brilliant book—“strangely conceited, but instructive,” Santayana said of it—but was written under conditions of stress and bitterly attacked the realists, in particular suggesting in its closing paragraph that “the minute philosophers of my youth, for all their profession of a purely scientific detachment from practical affairs, were the propagandists of a coming Fascism”.
His intellectual connections were notably with Italy, particularly through his friend Guido de Ruggiero. There is historical disagreement how far he was influenced by Croce and Gentile (though he certainly dis-owned the latter as a worthwhile philosopher when he became a Fascist). He shared with them (significantly) an influence of Vico. Much of his special approach lay in his sense of history. He was himself a historian, and unusually—today, unthinkably—worked professionally in both philosophy and in ancient history.
Born in 1889, he went to University College and took Mods and Greats, graduating in 1912. He became the Philosophy Fellow at Pem-broke College, and in 1927 he was appointed University Lecturer in Philosophy and Roman History. When he had written three books in ancient history, culminating in Roman Britain (1932), he was appointed Waynflete Professor of Metaphysical Philosophy in 1935. From this deep historical experience, he formed significant views on the philosophy of history; the history of philosophy; and the interpenetration, as he supposed, of the history of thought and the study of metaphysics. All of this was unusual. The philosophy of history, because practically no-one studied it. The history of philosophy, because practically no-one really did it, although they said that they did. And the interpenetration of the history of thought and metaphysics, because it was entirely original. No-one in Oxford and few in Britain and America have been so impressed by the significance of history as Collingwood, except for Berlin, who has acknowledged Collingwood’s influence; and it is significant that Berlin, whose conception of what philosophy is was rather influenced by positivism, gave up philosophy (at least, as he himself identified the subject) in favour of the history of ideas.
The third reason for considering Collingwood is that he had original and some good ideas. He also had some bad ones, and many of his interesting ideas tend to be expressed in a confusing way. Partly this was because much of his significant work was produced towards the very end of his life when he was ill. He resigned from his chair in 1941 because of failing health, having had a breakdown in 1932 and repeated strokes from 1938. He died in January 1943, aged 53. Leaving aside two early philosophical works, he published An Essay on Philosophical Method in 1933, of which he said that it was “my best book in matter; in style, I may call it my only book”. But he said this in his Autobiography, which was published in 1939, when he had produced in addition only The Principles of Art, in 1938. The Essay on Metaphysics came out in 1940, and The New Leviathan in 1942; he left a lot of material, which was edited by T. M. Knox (who was thought by most people to be an unfortunate choice), and published as The Idea of Nature (1945) and The Idea of History (1946).
STYLE
However, the problems of Collingwood’s philosophy for those with a concern for sound analytical book-keeping are not only due to the circumstances in which some of it was written. Collingwood’s contempt—and contempt was a sentiment which he quite often expressed—for the “minute philosophers” meant that he simply did not try to write philosophy in the way that was favoured by them (and is still favoured by most of us some of the time and some of us all of the time), a way which aims to head off any ambiguity or any implication which some reader, perhaps a very perverse reader, might improperly take up: a style, that is to say, which seeks precision by total mind control, through issuing continuous and rigid interpretative directions.
The Essay on Philosophical Method is in fact mostly a dull and dated book, full of what are likely to seem now unhelpful distinctions and assimilations, but it does contain a marvellous section at the end about philosophical style, called “Philosophy as a Branch of Literature”.
Every piece of philosophical writing is primarily addressed by the writer to himself. Its purpose is not to select from among his thoughts those of which he is certain and to express those, but the very opposite: to fasten upon the difficulties and obscurities in which he finds himself involved, and try, if not to solve or remove them, at least to understand them better.
. . . The philosophers who have had the deepest instinct for style have repeatedly shrunk from adopting the form of a lecture or instructive address, and chosen instead that of a dialogue . . . or a meditation . . . or a dialectical process where the initial position is modified again and again as difficulties in it come to light.
The prose-writer’s art is an art that must conceal itself and produce not a jewel that is looked at for its own beauty but a crystal in whose depth the thought can be seen without distortion or confusion; and the philosophical writer in especial follows the trade not of a jeweller but of a lens-grinder. He must never use metaphors or imagery in such a way that they attract to themselves the attention due to his thought; if he does that, he is writing not prose but, whether well or ill, poetry; but he must avoid this not by rejecting all use of metaphors and imagery, but by using them, poetic things themselves, in the domestication of prose: using them just so far as to reveal thought, and no further.
THE HISTORY OF PHILOSOPHY
Collingwood thought that philosophical writing laid certain responsibilities on the reader—a kind of patience; a postponement, though not a refusal, of criticism; and imagination, to grasp what the writer’s problem might be. Moreover, he had a general principle, which we shall come back to, that any assertion only made sense as an answer to a question, and that you could not understand what was being said by an author unless you understood—this did not imply, explicitly formulate—the question that he was trying to answer.
This had particular implications for the practice of the history of philosophy. Peter Strawson, talking about Paul Grice, quoted with approval a remark of Grice’s, which he claimed all Oxford philosophers would agree with, that we “should treat great but dead philosophers as we treat great and living philosophers, as having something to say to us”. Collingwood would have agreed with this, so long as it is not assumed that what the dead have to say to us is the same sort of thing as the living have to say to us. He would not have agreed, that is to say, with Ryle’s frequent injunction to treat something written by Plato, for instance, as though it had come out in Mind last month. Collingwood insisted, correctly, that the questions being answered by Plato and Hobbes, for instance, were not the same, and that you literally could not understand them unless you understood this. The “realists” had very little sense of this; and some of the most instructive (as well as enjoyable) pages in the Autobiography are those in which he addresses their methods.
. . . so, in ethics, a Greek word like dei cannot be legitimately translated by using the word “ought”, if that word carries with it the notion of what is sometimes called “moral obligation”. Was there any Greek word or phrase to express that notion? The “realists” said there was; but they stultified themselves by adding that the “theories of moral obligation” expounded by Greek writers differed from modern theories such as Kant’s about the same thing. How did they know that the Greek and the Kantian theories were about the same thing? Oh, because dei (or whatever word it was) is the Greek for “ought”.
It was like having a nightmare about a man who had got it into his head that triêrês was the Greek for “steamer” . . .
If Collingwood had not been so ignored, it might not be necessary, as I am afraid it is, to remind people of this now. It might also not have been necessary to rediscover for oneself that the point of reading philosophers of the past is to find in them something different from the present—and that is not just a historical but a philosophical discovery. That much is true, even if we do not share the view which Collingwood evidently held, that there are no permanent problems of philosophy at all. It is not immediately clear why he held this, and the question is related to some matters we shall come to later. It is worth saying now that it would follow from something that Collingwood did favour, a historicist application of a kind of holism, which may come from Vico, a tendency to think of an age as having an overall character.
Related to that, we do not, in order to sympathise with Collingwood’s admirable outlook on the history of philosophy, have to share his very radical view, which he came to hold at the end of his life, about the historical character of metaphysics, something that I shall come to in the last section of these remarks.
RECOVERING THE PAST
The “realists” or “minute philosophers”, having misidentified Plato’s or Leibniz’s question, could announce that the philosopher had answered it wrongly. It was less obvious on Collingwood’s own view what it was for Plato or Leibniz to have answered their own questions rightly or wrongly. In the Autobiography5 he ties himself into something of a knot about this:
If Leibniz was so confused in his mind as to make a complete mess of the job of solving his problem, he was bound at the same time to mix up his own tracks so completely that no reader could see quite clearly what his problem had been. For one and the same passage states his solution and serves as evidence of what the problem was. The fact that we can identify his problem is proof that he has solved it: for we can only know what the problem was by arguing back from the solution.
On the same page, he says that this does not mean that the question “was Plato right to think as he did on such and such a question?” must be left unanswered. This would be as “lunatic” as to suppose that it was part of history that the Greek admiral Phormio acted as he did, but not part of history that he beat the Corinthians by doing so. There is more than one thing questionable about this analogy; but the present point is that Collingwood, in deploying the analogy, seems to leave himself and us in the position that there can be an answer to the question “was Plato right to think as he did on such and such a question?”, but only if the answer is “yes”.
Now we could certainly deal with this by nudging Collingwood into a more reasonable position (though, remembering Collingwood’s remarks about the dialectical character of philosophical writing, we should probably say: more reasonable than the position he has reached at this stage of the argument). We do not have to assume that the philosophical writer has “made a complete mess” of the job. Nor need we assume that the only access to his problem is by arguing back from the solution. In fact, Collingwood would not disagree; and he did think that one relied on other parts of the text, and other texts, and other evidence, for the reconstruction of a question in the history of thought. So we are not locked in the paradox which we just glimpsed. But rather than simply taking on board these sensible modifications and qualifications, we should perhaps look at the question of why Collingwood might have been pushed in the direction of the paradox in the first place.
Here we need to address a broader doctrine that Collingwood held about historical understanding more generally. Probably Collingwood’s most famous remark is “all history is the history of thought”. History he held was “the history of res gestae, the actions of human beings done in the past”.6 The activity described in relation to the history of philosophy, of determining the writer’s question and his answer to it, applies quite generally to understanding past action: to understand what an agent did, we have to understand what his question was, and what thought he had in answering it. The question “Why did Caesar cross the Rubicon?” is, if a properly historical question, to be taken as: “What did Caesar think, as a result of which he crossed the Rubicon?”. Moreover, there is no way in which Caesar’s thought can be identified entirely from the outside; for the historian to answer the question, he has to have Caesar’s thought—the very same thought—himself. “Thought can never be mere object. To know someone else’s activity of thinking is possible only on the assumption that this same activity can be reenacted in one’s own mind. In that sense, to know ‘what someone is thinking’ (or ‘has thought’) involves thinking it for oneself.”
This is the most famous of Collingwood’s views, and the only one that I recall being discussed in the Oxford of the 1950s (except, very occasionally, some things that he had said about the philosophy of art, which I shall not discuss). There were several reasons for this being so. There was not much work being done on the philosophy of history, and Collingwood was very saliently one of the few recent and local contributors to it. Moreover, one of the few who was working on it, and the most senior, was W. H. Walsh, who had Idealist sympathies which inclined him at least to take Collingwood seriously. But most did not take him all that seriously, and the final reason for Collingwood being discussed at that time was that the reenactment thesis provided a convenient and seemingly rather dotty version of the kind of thing that a sensible empiricist-style account of history would want to avoid.
As Patrick Gardiner has said in a recent article, 8 a lot of this criticism was based on misunderstanding. One basis of the misunderstanding was to suppose that the reenactment thesis proposed a method; but, as Gardiner says, this is not the main point: “the question at issue is not so much one of the techniques the historian uses in his search after knowledge and understanding as one of what constitutes such knowledge and understanding when he has it”.
Another source of misunderstanding was a reading of the relation of thought and action in Collingwood in dualistic terms. This really was gratuitous: indeed, Collingwood emphasised the expression of thought in action, and in The New Leviathan he diagnosed dualistic errors in Descartes and was saluted for doing so by Ryle, Collingwood’s successor as Waynflete Professor, in his inaugural lecture.
With the removal of these misunderstandings, we can be freed from the idea that what is at issue is some form of diachronic and self-confirming telepathy. Evidence is needed, and interpretation of action and circumstance help the historian to a situation in which he can reenact the thought.
Three other objections to Collingwood’s account of history are worth rather more consideration.
Collingwood’s typical insistence that re-enactment is involved in, and central to, any historical understanding, together with the thesis which that implies, that the subject matter of all history is individual action, unduly narrows the scope of history. This criticism seems to me unanswerable. Collingwood’s view goes with a dislike of causes as opposed to reasons, something that is expressed, for instance, in his deeply eccentric attack on Thucydides for having turned history (which Herodotus had initiated) into something different, namely social science.11 It will be enough to say that history potentially involves, and often puts into the foreground, the understanding of actions in such terms.
A second objection is that the thesis may be thought to be, to use one of Collingwood’s words, “lunatic”: on his account, it seems, the historian, in his moment of understanding Caesar, will be trying to cross the Rubicon, or doing the nearest thing he can to doing that. But Colling-wood had an answer to that, an answer which, he claimed, it took him a great deal of trouble to get right.12 This was the idea of “encapsulation”, which depends on the point that the context in which the historian re-enacts the past thought—the context of the “real life” of the historian—is quite different from, and conflicts with, the presuppositions of that thought being appropriate. Having the thought, the re-enactment, is simulation, thinking in someone else’s person. The content of the thought, if the attempt has been successful, is the same as that of the past agent’s thought, but it occurs in the biography of the historian only in quotes or, as it were, indented.
There are two things that we should not say here. One is that the content is not asserted but entertained. The reason for not saying this is that the distinctions between assertion, entertaining, questioning and so on recur within the re-enactment itself. Nor should we say that the historian is “pretending” to think the thought. Pretending to x implies that one is not x-ing (or, at the very least, that one is not intentionally xing).13 This is why not all dramatic acting is pretending; and it is very relevant, in the context of the present question, to think of dramatic acting which consists of improvisation.
A useful comparison is with another application of Verstehen, the ethnographer’s stance. The ethnographer in the field can come to think as the people think with whom he is living, and he can enact their judgements and deliberations in his own person. But at the end of the line, these are not his thoughts. The difference from the historian is that the ethnographer may lose the end of the line: he may find it hard to come back to his regular life and may, as it used to be said, “go native”. The historian cannot do that, unless he goes mad; the end of the line, at which those thoughts which he thinks are not his thoughts, is all the time immediately in front of him.
The third problem with Collingwood’s position concerns irrational or mistaken thoughts. William Dray, a philosopher who has done a lot to keep Collingwood’s approach alive in the philosophy of history, referring to “empathy” theories in history, has said “one cannot re-think a practical argument one knows to be invalid”.14 In one sense, this seems to be wrong, and it can be met by appealing again to encapsulation. I can move in and out of an enactment, just enough to control it with my own sense of reality; we may compare, in the ethnographic case, the complex ambivalences of a modern investigator’s approach to traditional magic. However, this only applies when I have identified the “invalid practical argument”. It is a different question if I cannot get to the point of recognising anything as the practical question or reasoning which was the agent’s; and this parallels, of course, the problem that we have already met in discussing the history of thought in the narrower sense, the problem of interpreting a radically confused text.
One, straightforward, thing to say is that there simply is a problem about interpreting a radically confused text, action, or set of actions. However, the problem is not as bad as it sounds, because there is a gradation from the intelligible, through things that are intelligibly confused, to that which is unintelligible. That last judgement does not simply return us to a situation in which, paradoxically, we are not in a position to make that very judgement. Precisely because there are such gradations, we can understand that something is unintelligible, without having to understand it.
However, this applies only to (relatively) particular cases—at most, certain sorts of texts, actions, and persons. It cannot apply generally—or rather, we should say, in order to keep open a significant area of discussion, too generally. We can understand a given text or action only in terms of a local set of conventions, possibilities and significances. It is what it is, means what it does, because of what it is possible to mean in those historical and social circumstances. (This reminds us again that re-enactment is not a kind of intuitive telepathy: it is based on knowing a lot about how things went there.) In understanding those circumstances themselves, how things went there, we do not have the same possibilities of detecting error or irrationality, because there is no further set of considerations which provide enough leverage to enable us to make the separation implicit in claiming both that we understand what is going on, and that we see in the light of this understanding that it is confused or irrational. At some level of generality—and we should stress, again, in order to keep that area of discussion open, that we do not yet know what level of generality—we get to a point at which it is a condition on our understanding of what is going on that it should make sense under our interpretation, in such a way that it does not come out as seriously confused or irrational. As Collingwood rather marvellously said: “We call them the Dark Ages, but all we mean is that we cannot see”.
Collingwood considered history rather than social understanding more generally, for instance ethnography, but this idea is of course familiar. It is the idea of what is sometimes called a principle of charity, but we should reject that name in relation to Collingwood, as for ourselves, because of its entirely inappropriate suggestions of condescension. But we should also be careful with the title which is sometimes now more favoured, “the principle of humanity”, 16 because that too strongly suggests a universalism of rationality, or (rather) a universalism of fairly determinate levels of rationality, applying to human beings as such. Collingwood, with his strongly historicist outlook, was very suspicious of such an idea. It must be true that Collingwood, or any other hermeneutical thinker (not that he used that expression, so far as I know), will need to make some universal assumptions about human beings in order to render the historicism, the historical varieties of experience, intelligible as varieties of human experience; but the essential question is, how determinate and specific those universal assumptions are taken to be.
At any rate, since we are dealing with Collingwood, let us label the principle “the principle of constructive re-enactment” (PCR). We can now see an answer to the question we noticed earlier, why Collingwood backed himself into the seeming paradox of there being only one answer to the question “Was Plato right to think what he thought on a certain question?”, namely the answer “yes”. The reason is, I suggest, that with regard to really great thinkers such as Plato and Leibniz, Collingwood took it that the PCR applied to them directly and not just to the background in which they wrote. Collingwood was disposed to think that such writers were the only philosophers worth reading anyway, or at least, the only ones worth reading for their own sakes, as opposed to their providing evidence for the belief system of their time. And to them, with a few sensible modifications and qualifications, Collingwood thought that the PCR applied directly.
It is important that there are at least two different—and in some degree, opposed—reasons why this might be so. One is that such writers embody or express in a particularly intense and deep way the general assumptions of a period or epoch. The other is that they create new assumptions, help to bring into being new canons of what it is for theory or practice to make sense.17 It looks in a way as though Collingwood ought really to favour the first option, a description of Plato or Leibniz, in terms of expressing rather than creating assumptions. However, there is a problem in even stating this question because, on Collingwood’s last and most intriguing views about the nature of philosophy, it is hard to say what such philosophers were doing at all, in particular to the extent that they were doing metaphysics. It is this question that I shall now turn to.
METAPHYSICS AND PRESUPPOSITIONS
We need first to look back at the method of question and answer. Collingwood said18 that Bacon, in his epigram to the effect that the scientist must “put Nature to the question”, laid down the true theory of experimental science. It contained the idea that the enquirer must take the initiative, deciding what he wants to know, and formulating this in the form of a question, and “he must find means of compelling nature to answer, devising tortures under which she can no longer hold her tongue”. Mutatis mutandis, Collingwood thought that this also contained the true theory of historical method. Equally, the historian must be active, having a question to which he needs an answer. Passive history Collingwood calls “scissors and paste history”, the mere assemblage, with some critical mutual adjustment, of what the records have happened to leave to us. In archaeology, it was mere rummaging around, trying to find something. As he interestingly says,
“Let us see what we can find out about this site” is no more a “question”, as I understand that term, than are such pseudo-questions as “What is knowledge?”, “What is duty?”, “What is the summum bonum?”, “What is art?”. Like them, it is only a vague portmanteau phrase covering a multitude of possible questions, but not precisely expressing any of them.
In The Idea of History Collingwood illustrates the idea with the straightforward example of a detective story in the English mode, where the Poirot like figure gets the right answers because he asks the right questions. Collingwood took himself to have used such methods in his archaeology. (Indeed, critics of that work have said that Collingwood only too readily interpreted what he found as the answer to his question.) In the Autobiography, he gives a rather famous account of how, in the First World War, he developed the idea because he had to walk each day to work past the Albert Memorial, and came to ask himself whether, in finding it loathsome to an incomprehensible degree, he was simply failing to understand the world from which it came and in which it was admired. In that work, 20 further, he discussed these ideas in terms of what he called “a logic of question and answer”, but there is no reason to follow him in this, particularly given the ill-advised and arrogant remarks he offered there about what is ordinarily called “logic”.
What matters for the present question is the elaboration of his ideas about question and answer that Collingwood introduced in the Essay on Metaphysics.
There, Collingwood lays down the following theses in a rather formal style. (It will be obvious, e.g. in relation to the first, that they have to be understood to some degree as legislating about the notions involved.)
(1) Every statement is made in answer to a question.
(2) Every question involves a presupposition.
This means that the presupposition makes it a pointful, answerable question; indeed, makes it a determinate question. (It will be obvious that the identity of a question is not determined by purely linguistic means: one can ask the same question in different linguistic ways, and a different question by using the same words.)
(3) The logical efficacy of a supposition does not depend on the truth of what is supposed, or even on its being thought true, but only on its being supposed.
A supposition has “logical efficacy” in relation to a question if it causes (as Collingwood incautiously puts it) a question to arise: for instance, “this mark on a stone is an intentional inscription” has logical efficacy in relation to the question “what does it mean?”.
(4) A presupposition is relative or absolute: relative if it stands to one question as presupposition and to another as answer; absolute if, for all questions to which it is related, it stands only as presupposition and not as answer.
From this it follows
(5) Absolute presuppositions are not propositions, in the sense of what is stated.
(5) does not mean that absolute presuppositions cannot be formulated or verbally expressed. It may be, possibly, that they do not have to be verbally expressed, but they certainly can be. To deny this would be inconsistent with many things that Collingwood says, for instance with the question22 “Is this presupposition relative or absolute?”. What “proposition” means is something that can be responsibly claimed to be true on the basis of proof, demonstration, verification, empirical evidence, etc.;23 that is impossible in relation to an absolute presupposition because, if it could be verified, it would be the answer to a question.
This is illustrated by Collingwood’s discussion of Mill on the principle of causation or the uniformity of nature. Such a principle was an absolute presupposition of science as Mill understood it, but Mill took, in typical positivist fashion, as Collingwood put it, a supposition for a proposition and got himself into a false position by trying to demonstrate it.
But metaphysics is the science of absolute presuppositions. Meta-physics does not propound (as defensible truth claims, that is to say) absolute presuppositions any more than natural science does, and it could not do so. It does propound a certain kind of proposition, to the effect that certain absolute presuppositions are in fact presupposed. Thus all metaphysical questions and propositions are historical, and metaphysics deals with a class of historical facts.
A historical reminder is in place at this point. A. J. Ayer’s Language, Truth and Logic had been published in 1936, and Collingwood took it and its dismissal of the old gang of “realists” seriously. When Colling-wood heard Prichard and Joseph complaining about the book and saying that it should never have been published, he said “Gentlemen, this book will be read when your names are forgotten”.25 But he thought that positivism’s “anti-metaphysics” was misconceived, and that it was based on such things as a childishly resentful attitude to ethics or religion, supported by a fear that metaphysics was “malicious” towards science (a phrase of Russell’s, from Mysticism and Logic). This was a mis-understanding, even if it was explicable why the positivists should have taken metaphysics to be an enemy of science: on their misconception of it, metaphysics would have been an enemy of science, though not in the way that they supposed.26 If metaphysics is what Collingwood says it is, the “historical study” of absolute presuppositions, then there are no objections to its status.
But is this account acceptable, or even fully intelligible? The first objection is an obvious one: why historical? Doesn’t our metaphysics address itself to our absolute presuppositions? In a sense, Collingwood does not mind about this. The present, he says, “is the recent past”, 27 and the kind of “metaphysical analysis”, as he calls it, which serves to disentangle absolute presuppositions is very much the same with regard to the past and the present. Indeed, this is what you would expect from the re-enactment doctrine: to say that thinking about our presuppositions is like thinking about other people’s is less surprising when one recalls that understanding other people’s thoughts in the past involves thinking them yourself in the present.28 These suppositions, importantly, are always in flux. Our present presuppositions are a transmutation of the past, and they are in course of transmutation towards the future. There are always “internal strains” in the “constellation of absolute pre-suppositions” at any given time. Metaphysical analysis can present those presuppositions and, presumably, the tensions between them, and this activity can be applied to one’s own case. We may suppose that some of such arguments might look like trying to establish one absolute presupposition at the expense of another; if that is so, then, on Collingwood’s view, that will be simply appearance, or alternatively some absolute pre-supposition has turned into a relative one.
However, there remain problems about the content of absolute pre-suppositions. The historical context I have mentioned, of replying to positivism, only serves to underline that problem. Consider some sentence “S” which might traditionally be taken to express some metaphysical claim, the content of which is unverifiable. It is not much of an answer to the positivist to claim that the following is a historical, verifiable proposition: We (or someone else) presuppose absolutely the content of “S”. To interpret this historical proposition we need to know what relation to what is involved in presupposing the content of “S”, and if the content of “S” is exhypothesi suspect, this looks fairly daunting. It is important that this problem remains even if one is less worried than the positivists were by, specifically, verification.
Collingwood does not offer any general guidance as to how the content of absolute presuppositions is to be identified. The one example with which he takes particular trouble, “God exists”, does not help very much. The existence of God is an absolute presupposition for thinking done by Christians, 29 and as such it cannot be proved. A thinker, addressing himself to “God exists” as a metaphysical proposition, will put in the “metaphysical rubric” which yields a proposition to the effect that we presuppose in our thinking that God exists. Collingwood continues, 30 “If ‘God exists’ means [sic] ‘somebody believes that God exists’ (which is what it must mean if it is a metaphysical proposition) it is capable of proof . . . historical proof ”. He then points out that an archetypal proof of God’s existence in the Christian tradition is the Ontological Proof, which indeed derives “God exists” from somebody’s believing that God exists.
This may be a spectacular tour de force, but if it achieves anything, it achieves it only for this very peculiar case. Indeed, Collingwood’s wider discussion of this case itself suggests that the content of absolute propositions, in its relation to the thinking of which they are the absolute pre-suppositions, can diverge a great way from the apparent semantic content of an absolute presupposition as verbally expressed. The presupposition that God exists is expressed, for instance, in our treating nature in our science as a unitary system.
So, two problems remain: that of identifying the content of absolute presuppositions, and of specifying the relation that they have to the thinking or activities of enquiry and so forth of which they are the pre-suppositions. Those two problems come together in the question already mentioned, of how an agent or group of agents are supposed to be related to what, when it is said that they presuppose a given absolute pre-supposition.
COLLINGWOOD AND WITTGENSTEIN
I think that this represents a genuine problem. It is the version in Collingwood’s philosophy of a very real problem that presents itself to any philosophy which, like his, is hermeneutical and nonfoundationalist. The problem concerns the relation between the discursive formulation of ideas or assumptions, on the one hand, and, on the other, practices and the description of practices. This is part of the question of how a reflective account of a practice, in particular of a practice of enquiry, can be given. Collingwood does not think that people can typically state the absolute presuppositions of their activities, and he makes a special point of saying that an absolute presupposition cannot be discovered by introspection.31 He does not think that people engaged in a practice necessarily or typically can be best described as believing the absolute pre-suppositions of their activities; the discursive formulation in which something is presented as an absolute presupposition and looks superficially like something that could be believed or asserted, is a particular representation of an understanding which is implicit in and recovered from reflection on that practice.
Collingwood often speaks in terms of practices and changes of practices in a revealingly holistic way. In an interesting discussion of progress, he discusses a change in fishing methods between generations. The older generation will think that the old method is better than the new “not out of irrational prejudice, but because the way of life which it knows and values is built round the old method, which is therefore certain to have social and religious associations that express the intimacy of its connection with this way of life as a whole”.32 In The Essay on Metaphysics, 33 he speaks of a certain “natural piety”, in Wordsworth’s phrase, which could help the metaphysician simply to recognise facts—things simple and familiar, visible to the eyes of a child, and perhaps hidden from clever men because they are too clever. He saluted Samuel Alexander for expressing in an unassuming way such an outlook. Such things are not matters of proof or argument, not even of belief. The idea that the world is responsive to magic, for instance, is not a proposition which is refuted: “As long as you believe in a world of magic, that is the kind of world in which you live”.34 (And this can be taken as suggesting what, if anything, might count as “a belief in” a world of magic.)
Since absolute presuppositions structure practices; since they are not propositions in the sense of things believed; and since Collingwood’s examples, though not his own account, suggest a difficulty in identifying their discursive formulations; then perhaps Collingwood should have acknowledged more than he did in this connection what in relation to Wittgenstein is called the primacy of practice, and the strength of Goethe’s phrase, quoted more than once by Wittgenstein: Im Anfang war die Tat, in the beginning was the deed. Other resemblances to Wittgenstein, with regard to meaning as use, and the necessary expression of thought in action, have been noted by various writers.
I should like to end, not by suggesting a compterendu of relations between the two thinkers, but by mentioning one or two considerations which Collingwood encourages us to bear in mind in these connections, more perhaps than Wittgenstein does.
(a) The account of metaphysics helps to bring out, though it does not solve, the question of the relations of reflection, and hence of philosophical reflection, to practice, and the status of discursive formulations of assumptions recovered from practice. Some Wittgensteinians seem to think that the primacy of practice means the primacy of descriptions of practice, and this, certainly, is a mistake, one that Wittgenstein himself did not make. However, for more than one reason (including, perhaps, the “realist” origins of his own philosophical formation, and his ongoing fear that the activity of philosophy itself was pathological), Wittgenstein did not spend much time on considering how reflective descriptions of practice might be related to practice itself.
(b) Wittgenstein largely ignored history, and disliked science. Colling-wood respected science and based his entire philosophy on history. This at once places science as one activity among others, and reminds us of genuine and pervasive cultural variation. It therefore gives us richer resources for combating a stupid scientism in philosophy, since it invites one to think about the cultural role of science among other forms of understanding. At the same time, it provides a concrete sense of variations between actual “forms of life”. The emphasis on history, again, also emphasises (a), since it adds to our reflections a sense of that variation.
(c) Collingwood’s emphasis on historical change and constant tension in absolute presuppositions counteracts a danger which is implicit in talking in holistic terms about ways of life, the danger of falling into assumptions of functional coherence. Those assumptions simply install at the general cultural level Collingwood’s paradox of the necessary rationality of a correctly interpreted text. I said before that Collingwood applied his principle of constructive re-enactment to whole systems and very great writers, rather than to every text or action taken particularly. However, while this is true, it is qualified by the emphasis on change. One has to make, not just a system, but a movement between various stages of systems, intelligible, and one thing that makes this possible is that in its earlier stage the system of thoughts, understandings or practices was in fact not fully coherent, but was under tension.36 Wittgensteinian accounts of social understanding have, notoriously, tended to favour a static picture of a fully functioning and coherent system.
(d) There is a well-known problem to be found in writers about these questions, particularly in Wittgenstein, which lies in their evasive use of “we”, which may be taken in an inclusive sense, as implying universalistic preconditions on interpretation and intelligibility; or, in a contrastive sense, under which “we”, here and now, are distinct from others elsewhere and else when, who lived in other and different intelligible human formations. Collingwood has a good deal to offer on this set of questions. He himself tended to a radical historicism which played down, as I have said, the idea of permanent philosophical problems, and does not make much of assumptions which may be necessary in order to identify any way of life as a human way of life at all. He is helped, however, here once again by his emphasis on history, where continuity and change permit a developmental, diachronic understanding which is not offered by the blankly ethnographic case—still less by the purely imaginary and schematic ethnographic case which is favoured by Wittgenstein, the relation of which to “us” tends to be thoroughly ambiguous.
To consider, as Collingwood did, the case of history, and in particular the history of the Western world, is, of course, not a substitute for considering also the hermeneutical problems raised by ethnographic and similar studies. But it is, in itself, a deeply important case. Moreover, it is the case which is implicated very deeply in our attempts to understand the ethnographic case as well, and in our attempts to determine the relations between cultural variation and some universal assumptions about human nature (assumptions which, as we have seen, are necessary if we are going to be able to understand the notion of cultural variation itself). For it is a lively question, how far “our” understanding (and that is meant to preserve every ambiguity of “we”) of the ethnographically exotic, of cultural variation, and hence of the humanly universal, itself indelibly carries with it assumptions drawn from our cultural experience as historically understood.
No adequate philosophical enquiry into interpretation can eventually ignore these questions, and so it must itself be informed by a historical sense. Collingwood reminds us of that fact; he reminds us of the problem and its importance; and, besides offering philosophical writing which in twentieth-century British philosophy is unrivalled in its brilliance, gives us fruitful lines of enquiry into that problem.
1 G. J. Warnock, English Philosophy since 1900, Oxford University Press 1958.
2 “The Life, Times, and Legacy of R. G. Collingwood” in Philosophy, History and Civilization: Interdisciplinary Perspectives on R. G. Collingwood, edd. D. Boucher, J. Connelly & T. Modood, University of Wales Press, 1995.
3 An Essay on Philosophical Method 209–214.
4 Autobiography 63 following. The whole chapter is very worthwhile.
5 Autobiography 69–70.
6 The Idea of History 9.
7 The Idea of History 288; compare Autobiography 112 (about Nelson).
8 “Interpretation in History: Collingwood and Historical Understanding” in Anthony O’Hear ed., Verstehen and Humane Understanding (Royal Institute of Philosophy Supplement 41, Cambridge UP, 1996), 109–119.
9 Page 114, Gardiner’s emphasis. There are passages in which it is clear that this is what Collingwood means, although his formulation is misleading: e.g. The Idea of History 282 “. . . what kind of knowledge has [the historian]?: in other words, what must the historian do in order that he may know [his facts]?”—A similar distinction between method and constitution may be relevant to contemporary discussions in the philosophy of mind (not primarily concerned with understanding the past) about the supposed distinction between “simulation theory” and “theory theory”.
10 “Philosophical Arguments, ” in Gilbert Ryle, Collected Papers Vol. 2 (London:Hutchinson; New York: Barnes & Noble, 1971), chap. 14.
11 The Idea of History 28–31. The same bias comes out in the very poorly considered attack on psychology in part II of Essay on Metaphysics, which apart from anything else offends against Collingwood’s own canons of how to read a text.
12 Autobiography 112.
13 In this I side, in a famous disagreement, with Anscombe and against Austin. J. L. Austin, “Pretending”, and G.E.M. Anscombe, “Pretending”, Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, Supplementary Volume 32 (1958), now in J. L. Austin, Philosophical Papers, and G.E.M. Anscombe, The Collected Philosophical Papers of G.E.M. Anscombe, vol. 2, respectively.
14 Philosophy and History: A Symposium, ed. Sidney Hook (New York, 1963), page 113; quoted by Patrick Gardiner, page 118.
15 The Idea of History 218.
16 The title is owed to Robin Grandy.
17 If one has an attachment to the idea of genius (as I think Collingwood did not, particularly), one can see this distinction as corresponding either to two theories of genius, or to two types of genius.
18 The Idea of History 269.
19 Autobiography 122.
20 33, 42.
21 Essay on Metaphysics 23 seq.
22 Allowed at page 40.
23 This point is made by Rex Martin in an article “Collingwood’s Claim That Meta-physics Is a Historical Discipline”, in Philosophy, History and Civilization, at page 207.
24 Essay on Metaphysics 49, 61–62.
25 Quoted by Boucher, op. cit. note 36.
26 There is a sparkling paragraph on this theme at Essay on Metaphysics page 169.
27 Essay on Metaphysics 70.
28 This point does not entail the view, rejected by Martin, op. cit. page 216, that recovering or coming to know an absolute proposition is just an exercise of re-enactment.
29 Essay on Metaphysics 186.
30 Essay on Metaphysics 188.
31 Essay on Metaphysics 188.
32 The Idea of History 325.
33 Chapter XVII, 172 seq.
34 Essay on Metaphysics 194.
35 See Boucher, op. cit. note 42 for references.
36 This is, of course, a fundamental Hegelian principle. Beyond this important point, I do not suppose that Collingwood was a very Hegelian thinker, but to argue this would require a longer treatment, in particular of Collingwood’s understanding of progress, and the extent to which he was in some sense, unlike Hegel, a relativist.
37 Peter Winch’s The Idea of a Social Science and Its Relation to Philosophy (London:Routledge & Regan Paul, 1958) was an early and influential example of this tendency.
WITTGENSTEIN
