GREEK: GENERAL
ONE
The Legacy of Greek Philosophy
THE GREEKS AND THE HISTORY OF PHILOSOPHY
The legacy of Greece to Western philosophy is Western philosophy. Here it is not merely a matter, as in science, of the Greeks having set out on certain paths in which modern developments have left their achievements far behind. Nor is it just a matter, as in the arts, of the Greeks having produced certain forms, and certain works in those forms, which succeeding times would—some more, some very much less—look back to as paradigms of achievement. In philosophy, the Greeks initiated almost all its major fields—metaphysics, logic, the philosophy of language, the theory of knowledge; ethics, political philosophy, and (though to a much more restricted degree) the philosophy of art. Not only did they start these areas of enquiry, but they progressively distinguished what would still be recognized as many of the most basic questions in those areas. In addition, among those who brought about these developments there were two, Plato and Aristotle, who have always, where philosophy has been known and studied in the Western world, been counted as supreme in philosophical genius and breadth of achievement, and whose influence, directly or indirectly, more or less consciously, under widely varying kinds of interpretation, has been a constant presence in the development of the Western philosophical tradition ever since.
Of course philosophy, except at its most scholastic and run down, does not consist of the endless reworking of ancient problems, and the idea that Western philosophy was given almost its entire content by the Greeks is sound only if that content is identified in the most vague and general way—at the level of such questions as ‘what is knowledge?’ or ‘what is time?’ or ‘does sense-perception tell us about things as they really are?’ Philosophical problems are posed not just by earlier philosophy, but by developments in all areas of human life and knowledge; and all aspects of Western history have affected the subject-matter of philosophy—the development of the nation-state as much as the rise and fall of Christianity or the progress of the sciences. Yet even with issues created by such later developments, it is often possible to trace contemporary differences in philosophical view to some general contrast of out-looks which had its first expression in the Greek world.
Granted the size of the Greek achievement in philosophy, and the depth of its influence, it would be quite impossible to attempt anything except a drastically selective account of either. Some very important and influential aspects of Greek philosophy I shall leave out entirely: these include political philosophy (which is the concern of another chapter), and also Greek contributions to the science of logic, which were very important but demand separate, and moderately technical, treatment.1 More-over, in the matter of influences, I shall not attempt to say anything about what is certainly the most evident and concentratedly important influence of Greek philosophy on subsequent thought, the influence of Aristotle on the thought of the Middle Ages. Aristotle, who was for Thomas Aquinas ‘The Philosopher’, for Dante il maestro di color che sanno, ‘the master of those who know’, did much to form, through his various and diverse interpreters, the philosophical, scientific, and cosmological outlook of an entire culture, and the subject of Aristotelianism would inevitably be too much for any essay which wanted to discuss anything else as well. Aristotle’s representation in what follows has suffered from his own importance.
After saying something in general about the Greeks and the history of philosophy, and about the special positions of Plato and Aristotle, I shall try to convey some idea of the variety of Greek philosophical interests; but, more particularly, I shall pursue two or three subjects in greater detail than any attempt at a general survey would have allowed, in the be-lief that no catalogue of persons and doctrines is of much interest in philosophy, and that a feel for what certain thinkers were about can be conveyed only through some enactment of the type of reasons and arguments that weighed with them: of not just what, but how, they thought. In this spirit, if still very sketchily, I shall take up some arguments of Greek philosophers about two groups of questions—on the one hand, about being, appearance, and reality, on the other about knowledge and scepticism. In both, the depth of the Greek achievement is matched by the persistence of similar questions in later philosophy. In another matter, ethical enquiry, I shall lay the emphasis rather more on the contrasts between Greek thought and most modern outlooks, contrasts which seem to me very important to an understanding of our own outlooks and of how problematical they are.
I have said that the Greeks initiated most fields of enquiry in philosophy, and many of its major questions. It may be, by contrast, that there are just two important kinds of speculation in the later history of philosophy which are so radically different in spirit from anything in Greek thought as to escape from this generalization. Greek philosophy was deeply concerned, and particularly at its beginnings, with issues involved in the contrast between monism and pluralism. It is not always easy to capture what was at issue in these discussions: in some of the earlier Greek disputes, the question seems to be whether there is in reality only one thing or more than one thing, but—as we shall see later—it is not easy to make clear what exactly was believed by someone who believed that there was, literally, only one thing. In later philosophy, and already in some Greek philosophy, questions of monism and pluralism are questions rather of whether the world contains one or more than one fundamental or irreducible kind of thing. One sort of monism in this sense which has been known both to the ancient and to the modern world is materialism, the view that everything that exists is material, and that other things, in particular mental experiences, are in some sense reducible to this material basis. Besides dualism, the outlook that accepts that there are both matter and mind, not reducible to one another, philosophy since the Renaissance has also found room for another kind of monism, idealism, the monism of mind, which holds that nothing ultimately exists except minds and their experiences. It is this kind of view, with its numerous variations, descendants, and modifications, which we do not find in the ancient world. Largely speculative though Greek philosophy could be, and interested as it was in many of the same kinds of issues as those which generated idealism, it did not form that particular set of ideas, so important in much modern philosophy, according to which the entire world consists of the contents of mind: as opposed, of course, to the idea of a material world formed and governed by mind, a theistic conception which the Greeks most certainly had.
The other principal element in modern philosophy which is independent of the Greeks is something that first established itself at the beginning of the nineteenth century—that type of philosophical thought (of which Marxism is now the leading example) which places fundamental emphasis on historical categories and on explanation in terms of the historical process. The Greeks had, or rather, gradually developed, a sense of historical time and the place of one’s own period in it; and their thought also made use of various structures, more mythological than genuinely tied to any historical time, of the successive ages of mankind, which standardly pictured man as in a state of decline from a golden age (though an opposing view, in terms of progress, is also to be found). Some of the more radical thinkers, moreover, regarded standards of conduct and the value of political arrangements as relative to particular societies, and that conception had an application to societies distant in time. But the Greeks did not evolve any theoretical conception of men’s categories of thought being conditioned by the material or social circumstances of their time, nor did they look for systematic explanations of them in terms of history. This type of historical consciousness is indeed not present in all philosophical thought of the present day, but its absence from Greek philosophy is certainly one thing that marks off that philosophy from much modern thought.
It may be that these two, idealism and the historical consciousness, are the only two really substantial respects in which later philosophy is quite removed from Greek philosophy, as opposed to its pursuing what are recognizably the same types of preoccupation as Greek philosophy pursued, but pursuing them, of course, in the context of a vastly changed, extended, and enriched subject-matter compared with that available to the Greeks.
This is not to say that the Greeks possessed our concept of ‘philosophy’: or, rather, that they possessed any one of the various concepts of philosophy which are used in different philosophical circles in the modern world. Classical Greek applies the word philosophia to a wide range of enquiries; wider certainly than the range of enquiries called ‘philosophy’ now, which are distinguished from scientific, mathematical, and historical enquiries. But we should bear in mind that it is not only Greek practice that differs from modern practice in this way: for centuries ‘philosophy’ covered a wide range of enquiries, including those into nature, as is witnessed by the old use of the phrase ‘natural philosophy’ to mean natural science—The Mathematical Principles of Natural Philosophy is what Newton, at the end of the seventeenth century, called his great work on the foundations of mechanics. It does not follow, however, that these ages did not have some distinction between scientific and what would now be called philosophical enquiries—enquiries which, however they are precisely to be delimited, are concerned with the general presuppositions of knowledge, action, and values, and proceed by way of reflection on our concepts and ideas, not by way of observation and experiment. Earlier ages often did make, in one way or another, distinctions between such enquiries and others—it is merely that until comparatively recently the word ‘philosophy’ was not reserved to marking them.
It is important to bear this point in mind when dealing with the philosophy of the past, in particular ancient philosophy. It defines, so to speak, two grades of anachronism. The more superficial and fairly harmless grade of anachronism is displayed when we use some contemporary term to identify a class of enquiries which the past writers did themselves separate from other enquiries, though not by quite the same criteria or on the same principles as are suggested by the modern term. An example of this is offered by the branch of philosophy now called ‘metaphysics’. This covers a range of very basic philosophical issues, including reality, existence, what it is for things to have qualities, and (in the more abstract and less religious aspects of the matter) God. There is a set of writings devoted to such subjects in the canon of Aristotle’s works, and it is called the Metaphysics; and it is indeed from that title that the subject got its name. But the work was probably so called only from its position in the edition of Aristotle’s works prepared by Andronicus of Rhodes in the first century B.C.—these treatises were ta meta ta phusika, the books that came ‘after the books on nature’. Aristotle’s own name for most of these metaphysical enquiries was ‘first philosophy’. Nor is it just the name that was different, but so were the principles of classification, both in the rationale given of them and hence in what is included and excluded. Thus Aristotle has an account of his enquiries into ‘being in general’ which relates the themes of ‘first philosophy’ in a distinctively Aristotelian way to the rest of knowledge (roughly, he supposed that it was distinguished by having a subject-matter which was much more general than that of other enquiries); and it excludes some enquiries which might now be included in metaphysics, such as a priori reflections on the nature of space and time. These latter Aristotle takes up in the books now called the Physics, which were included among the books ‘about nature’; the name Physics itself being misleading, since what their contents mostly resemble is parts of metaphysics, and also what we would now call the philosophy of science, rather than what we now call physics.
These various differences do not stop us identifying Aristotle’s enquiries as belonging to various branches of philosophy as we now understand them: this level of anachronism can, with scholarship and a sense of what is philosophically relevant, be handled—as it must be, if we are going to be able to reconstitute from our present point of view something which it would not be too arbitrary to call the history of philosophy. But there is a second and deeper level of anachronism which we touch when we deal with writings to which modern conceptions of what is and what is not philosophy scarcely apply at all. With those writers who did not themselves possess some such distinctions, to insist on claiming them for the history of philosophy as opposed to, say, the history of science, constitutes an unhelpful and distorting form of anachronism. So it is with the earliest of Greek ‘philosophers’, the earlier Presocratics (a label which as a matter of fact is used not only for thinkers earlier than Socrates, but for some late-fifth-century contemporaries of his as well).
With regard to the earliest of Greek speculative thinkers, Thales, Anaximander, and Anaximenes, who lived in Miletus on the Greek seaboard of Asia Minor in the first seventy years of the sixth century B.C., it is impossible to give in any straightforward modern terms a classification of the kinds of question they were asking. This is not just because virtually nothing remains of their work (Thales, the oldest, in any case wrote nothing) and we have to rely on disputable reports; even if we had all their writings we could not assign them, in modern terms, to philosophy or to science. They are usually represented as asking questions such as ‘what is the world made of?’, but it is one achievement of intellectual progress that that question now has no determinate meaning; if a child asks it, we do not give him one or many answers to it, but rather lead him to the point where he sees why it should be replaced with a range of different questions. Of course, there is a sense in which modern particle theory is a descendant of enquiries started by the Milesians, but that descent has so modified the questions that it would be wrong to say that there is one unambiguous question to which we give the answer ‘electrons, protons, etc.’ and Thales (perhaps) gave the answer ‘water’.
We can say something—and we shall touch on this later—about the features of these speculations which make them more like rational enquiries than were the religious and mythological cosmologies of the East, which may have influenced them. And this is in fact a more important and interesting question than any about their classification as ‘philosophy’, something which in the case of these earliest thinkers is largely an empty issue.
CLASSICAL PHILOSOPHY AND THE PHILOSOPHICAL CLASSIC
The involvement of Greek philosophy in the Western philosophical tradition is not measured merely by the fact that ancient philosophy originated so many fields of enquiry which continue to the present day. It emerges also in the fact that in each age philosophers have looked back to ancient philosophy—overwhelmingly, of course, to Plato and Aristotle—in order to give authority to their own work, or to contrast it, or by reinterpretation of the classical philosophers to come to understand them, and themselves, in different ways. The Greek philosophers have been not just the fathers, but the companions, of Western philosophy. Different motives for this concern have predominated in different ages: the aim of legitimating one’s own opinions was more prominent in the Middle Ages and the Renaissance (which, contrary to popular belief, did not so much lose the need for intellectual authority, as choose different authorities), while the aim of historical understanding and self-understanding is more important in the present day. But from whatever motive, these relations to the Greek past are a particularly important expression of that involvement in its own history which is characteristic of philosophy and not of the sciences.
It has been a characteristic also of literature, though the nature of the involvement in that case is very different. It has been suggested2 that our conceptions of Western literature have room for the notions both of a ‘relative classic’—a work which endures and has influence and stands at least for a period of time as an exemplar—and of the ‘absolute classic’, above all the Aeneid, which defines for ever the high ‘classical’ style. Adapting these notions to philosophy, we might say that the classical philosophers Plato and Aristotle are classics in the sense that it has been impossible, at least up to now, for philosophy not to want to make some living sense of these writers and relate its positions to theirs, if only by showing why they have to be rejected: this is a status which they have shared, in the last 200 years, only with Kant. But they might be said also to define a classical style of philosophy—meaning by that a philosophical, not a literary, style. They are both associated with a grand, imperial, synoptic style of philosophy; though beyond that very general description, they have been acknowledged from ancient times to define two different styles, Plato being associated with speculative ambitions for philosophy, seeking to establish that another world of intellectual objects, the Forms, accessible to reason and not to the senses, was ultimately real, while Aristotle renounced these extravagant other-worldly hypotheses in favour of a more down-to-earth, classificatory, and analytical spirit, more respectful of the ordinary opinions of men—but defining a grand style for all that, since the systematic impulse was directed to producing one unified, ordered, and hierarchical world-picture.
Oppositions of the Platonic and the Aristotelian spirits have been a commonplace. In our own century, Yeats wrote, in Among School Children:
Plato thought nature but a spume that plays Upon a ghostly paradigm of things;Solider Aristotle played the taws Upon the bottom of a king of kings . . .
Most famously, the received contrast is expressed in Raphael’s fresco in the Vatican called The School of Athens, which displays the two central figures of Plato and Aristotle, the one with his hand turned towards heaven, the other downwards towards earth. In this connection one must remember the mystical elements which were associated with Platonic thought: not altogether falsely, so far as some of Plato’s own writings are concerned, but very heavily selected for and modified by the Neo-Platonist tradition. It is connected with this image of Plato that for a period in the early Middle Ages only the Timaeus (in Latin translation) was known, an untypical dialogue in which a theistic cosmogony is advanced.
Looked at more than superficially, the famed contrast is a very complex and ambiguous matter. The spirit of Plato has sometimes been associated with the religious impulse as such; but equally, and in fact more importantly, where the framework of thought is already religious, an expanded Aristotelianism has represented an ordered and stable understanding of the world in relation to God, while Platonism has been taken to represent variously humanism, magic, or individual rational speculation.
The old picture by which the Middle Ages built on Aristotle, but the Renaissance got its inspiration from Plato, has been much qualified by modern scholarship, but it retains enough truth, 3 and more than one important Renaissance thinker agreed with the words of Petrarch, that Plato ‘in that group came closest to the goal that may be reached by those whom heaven favours’. Much of this Platonic influence flowed into humane studies and the betterment of the soul, rather than the study of nature; and where the study of nature is pursued in the Renaissance, outside the continuing traditions of Aristotelian science, there is deep uncertainty and disagreement about what kinds of procedure or lore may prove effective in uncoding the messages hidden in phenomena. It is rather later, and with a vision much closer to modern conceptions of mathematical physics, that Galileo expressed what is still a Platonic influence in saying:
(Natural) philosophy is written in that vast book which stands forever open before our eyes, I mean the universe; but it cannot be read until we have learnt the language and become familiar with the characters in which it is written. It is written in mathematical language, and the letters are triangles, circles, and other geometrical figures, without which means it is humanly impossible to understand a single word. (Il Saggiatore, Question 6)
From this point on, the business of decipherment could be more readily detached from notions of an arcane mystery, which were present in the Renaissance, as they were originally in the early Pythagorean sects which influenced Plato; it could become the public task of critical scientific discussion.
Thus in one context Platonism may represent a mystical or cabbalistic interest, against which Aristotelianism stands for a cautious, observational approach, concerned to stick to the phenomena; in another, while a Platonic influence encourages rational enquiry into nature, Aristotelianism can be seen (as it was by Descartes, despite his occasional dissimulations) as an obscurantist attachment to mysterious essences and muddled vitalistic analogies. An opposition of the Platonic and Aristotelian spirits is indeed something real, which can be traced through very complex paths in the history of Western thought; but it defines not so much any one contrast, as rather a structure within which a large number of contrasts have in the course of that history found their place.
Various as these contrasts have been, what can be said is that the majority of them have been associated with interpretations of these philosophers’ views and, in many cases, with what have been believed to be their systems. Under these various interpretations, they have still been seen as authors of large world-views, as classical system-builders. Modern scholarship, encouraged by a philosophical scepticism about system-building, has tended to reduce the extent to which these philosophers are seen as expressing systems. In both cases, their works are now more clearly seen as the product of development over time, with corresponding changes of outlook; while discussions which in the past were taken to be fundamentally expository can be seen to be more provisional, exploratory, and question-raising than was supposed. If this point of view is accepted, does it mean that the importance of Plato and Aristotle, as more than a purely historical recognition, will for the first time be radically reduced? Perhaps not: the power and depth of their particular arguments may come to be what command admiration and interest rather than the breadth and ambition of their systems. Yet it would be superficial to rest too easily on this idea. The interest that these two philosophers have always commanded in the past has been generated not merely by admiration for their undoubted acuity, insight, and imagination, but, very often, by a belief that they had vast and unitary systematic ambitions, of a kind which we now have rather less reason to ascribe to them.
Apart from these issues of how the work of Plato and of Aristotle is to be interpreted, there are in any case other, more general influences likely to affect their traditional standing. Those features of twentieth-century culture which have weakened the hold of the classic, and of the idea that past works can have any authority over the taste of the present, apply in some degree to philosophy. Past geniuses of philosophy, as of the arts, look different under the influence of our idea, deeply felt and largely correct, that twentieth-century experience is drastically unprecedented. Again, in more technical areas of contemporary philosophy, there have been developments from which some of it has attained the research pattern of a science, and in any such area its interest in any of its past, let alone its Greek past, becomes necessarily more external and ultimately anecdotal. For both these reasons, the role of an absolute classic in philosophy, the role which Plato and Aristotle have peculiarly played, is one that quite conceivably may lose its importance. The question here is not whether philosophy might cease to be of interest—there is more than one dispiriting kind of reason why that might prove to be so—but whether, granted philosophy retains its interest, Plato and Aristotle might not do so, and might become finally historical objects, monumental paradigms of ancient styles. It is not impossible, but if it were to happen at all, there is one reason why it is less likely to happen to Plato than to his great companion: the fact that Plato’s work includes as a vivid and independent presence the ambiguous figure of Socrates, whose aspect as ironical critic of organized philosophy can be turned also against the Platonic philosophies, which at other points he is presented as expounding.
WHAT WE HAVE
The preeminent status of Plato and Aristotle is both the cause and the effect of their work being quite exceptionally well preserved: though in the case of both, and particularly of Aristotle, there was some luck involved. Of Plato’s works, we have everything that he is known to have published. Of Aristotle, we do not have his dialogues (for which he was most admired in antiquity), but we do have a large body of treatises which contain material prepared by him or in some cases by close associates or students.
Work later than Aristotle will not in general be touched on here except for some discussion of ancient scepticism; but we should not forget the large influence exercised on Western thought by the later schools, particularly the Stoics and Epicureans, quite apart from those influences on Christianity which are discussed in another chapter. The Presocratics will be of closer concern to us. They are known to us through fragments of their writings, and in many respects the situation is as described in the chapter on Greek science, that we have to rely on summaries and accounts by later writers, who may be remote in time, or stupid, or—as in the case of Aristotle, who was neither—have their own axe to grind. There does remain one very considerable and nearly continuous fragment of Presocratic writing, a substantial amount of the poem of Parmenides (who was born probably c. 515 B.C.): we owe this entirely to the Neoplatonist scholar Simplicius, who, in the commentary on Aristotle’s Physics which he wrote in the sixth century A.D., copied out long extracts from the poem on the ground that Parmenides’ book had at that time become very rare. Thanks to Simplicius, we have enough to reconstruct a continuous argument (which we shall turn to in the next section).
By contrast, another challenging figure, Heracleitus, who was almost certainly rather earlier than Parmenides and perhaps born c. 540 B.C., is known only from an assemblage of brief disconnected fragments, conflicting and obviously puzzled reports, and a number of unreliable anecdotes illustrating an original, pessimistic, and contemptuous personality. In his case, it is not clear what has been lost, either in terms of works, or, indeed, in possibility of understanding: it seems anyway that he wrote in the form of brief and dense epigrams, and he was famed already in antiquity for his obscurity. Plotinus said of him (Enneads, 4. 8), ‘He seems to speak in similes, careless of making his meaning clear, perhaps because in his view we ought to seek within ourselves, as he himself had successfully sought.’ The idea of searching within oneself was in Heracleitus, as it was in Socrates: ‘I searched myself’, Heracleitus said (fr.101).4 But he was almost certainly not careless of making himself clear:rather, his conception of truth was of something that essentially could not be expressed in a direct, discursive way. He probably thought of philosophical speech as he said of ‘the king whose oracle is at Delphi: he does not say, and he does not conceal—he gives a sign’ (fr. 93). In this, Socrates vitally differed from him.
Heracleitus’ views, so far as they can be discovered, centre on the necessity to the cosmos of constant change and ‘warfare’ between opposing principles, though these are held in some kind of reciprocal relation and balance. They elicited, at some remove, the respect of Lenin, but it was undoubtedly Nietzsche’s admiration that came closer to him—and not only because of his greater sympathy for Heracleitus’ contempt for the masses. Heracleitus has seldom had followers, but his deliberate ambiguities and startling images (as in fr. 52: ‘time is a child at play, playing draughts: the kingdom is a child’s’) have contributed to the deep resonances which he has occasionally evoked in later philosophy, most recently in Heidegger.
Of the later Presocratics, again no complete work survives; the most numerous fragments are of two contrasted writers. One is Democritus (roughly a contemporary of Socrates, being born c. 470 B.C.), who was concerned both with ethical questions and with the explanation of natural phenomena; he is most famous as one of the first theorists of physical atomism. The other is the riddling figure of Empedocles, who came from Acragas in Sicily, and was falsely represented by tradition as having died by throwing himself into Etna. He wrote not later than 450 B.C. two poems which later came to be called On Nature and Purifications. As these titles suggest, naturalistic elements, an interest in physical explanation, coexisted in his thought with a religious strain, and it is still disputed how they were combined, and whether his interest in nature was subordinate to magical concerns rather than the product of curiosity and free enquiry. Curiosity did to some extent motivate the Milesian thinkers, and free enquiry was consciously practised by Democritus and others of similar temper, such as the ingenious thinker Anaxagoras (born c. 500 B.C.), who is said to have been prosecuted by the Athenians for holding an impiously naturalistic view of the heavenly bodies.
There is one further group among the predecessors and contemporaries of Socrates, whom we should mention at this point: the so-called ‘Sophists’, whose interests were neither cosmological nor religious, but more practically orientated, largely towards the training of pupils in techniques for political and forensic success, a training for which they received money. These activities earned them an extremely bad reputation from Plato, whose attitude to them, expressed in all modes from the glittering mockery of the Protagoras to the contempt and disgust of the Gorgias and Republic, has not only left the Sophists in low esteem, but has helped to make the word ‘sophist’ useless for any historical purpose. This is particularly because Plato tended to conflate four different charges against them: that their teaching had a practical rather than a purely theoretical bent; that they took money; that they produced bad arguments, designed to puzzle and impress rather than to get at the truth; and that they advanced cynical, sceptical, amoral, and generally undesirable opinions.
It is not at all easy to disentangle these elements, nor to establish how far the Sophists, or some of them, had what we would now identify as genuine philosophical interests. They were prone to confuse, as has been well said, 5 the force of reason and the power of the spoken word, two things which Socrates’ method of question and answer gave a way of taking apart. Gorgias of Leontini, a celebrated stylistic innovator who influenced one of the greatest geniuses among Greek writers, the historian Thucydides, was a teacher of rhetoric whose excursion into meta-physics, a lost work called On What Is Not, may well, to judge from later summaries of it, have been parodistic. But more serious claims can be made for Protagoras of Abdera (born c. 490 B.C.), who commanded enough interest and respect from Plato for him to construct in his Theaetetus a sensitive elaboration of a relativistic theory of knowledge starting explicitly from a Protagorean basis. It may be true, as a recent writer has said, 6 that ‘he dominated the intellectual life of his time without being a truly original thinker’, setting rather an intellectual tone, sceptical and irreverent; but it is possible that he articulated more searching and systematic thoughts about knowledge and society than this implies. It would be interesting to know more of his work than we do, both to learn about the radical strain in fifth-century thought, and to form a more detailed idea of developments, which certainly occurred, in the theory of knowledge and the philosophy of language before Plato. It would be interesting, too, as a matter of sheer curiosity, to know how he continued his book On the Gods, of which we have only the discouraging first sentence: ‘About the gods I cannot know, whether they exist or not, nor what kind of beings they might be; there are many obstacles to knowledge, both the obscurity of the subject and the shortness of man’s life.’
THE BIRTH OF METAPHYSICS
Greek philosophy started at the edges of the Greek world: on the off-shore islands and the western seaboard of Asia Minor—Ionia—and to the far west, in the Greek colonies of Southern Italy and Sicily. The latter were not in any case independent of Ionian influence. Many received new colonists from Ionia after it was annexed by the Persians in the sixth century, and, in particular, the city of Elea in Southern Italy, famous for the philosophy of Parmenides and his pupil Zeno (thus called the ‘Eleatics’), was founded by the citizens of Phocaea, a city in Ionia, who had emigrated in large numbers.
The question has been much and inconclusively discussed, of why systematic cosmological thought, embodying an element of rational criticism, should have arisen in Ionia at this time. The great empires of the East had acquired a good deal of empirical information about measurement, positional astronomy, and such matters, while the Babylonian tradition embodied considerable sophistication in mathematical computation, though with little impulse, it seems, to discover an a priori order in the mathematical subject-matter. These various techniques, moreover, coexisted with pictures of the origin and structure of the universe which were straightforwardly mythological. Knowledge of these beliefs, transmitted through the Persian empire, may have played a role in the formation of Ionian cosmology, but, if so, they were essentially modified in a more critical and less mythological direction. The relatively autonomous political life of the small Greek cities perhaps played a part in the growth of critical and reflective thought, as contrasted with those ‘Asiatic vague immensities’, in Yeats’s phrase, of the great empires.
Open speculative enquiry was a necessary condition for the development of Greek philosophy, but it would be a mistake to think that everything which eventually fed into it was equally an example of that openness. The Milesians and Eleatics formed ‘schools’ only in the sense that these thinkers were connected by ties of intellectual influence and teaching; the Pythagorean school, on the other hand, which was founded in Croton in South Italy towards the end of the sixth century, was more like a religious brotherhood or secret society. The history of this school and its founder is wrapped in obscurity and legend, though we know that Pythagoras himself was another who emigrated from Ionia, having been born and having gained a reputation in Samos. The Pythagorean school played an important, if much disputed, role in the development of mathematics, though it is doubtful to what extent those studies figured in its earlier years. Its life was devoted, more certainly, to an ascetic religious discipline centring on concepts of the purification of the soul and reincarnation: ideas and practices perhaps influenced by shamanistic beliefs which would have reached Greece through the Thracians and Scythians.
Pythagorean ideas were to play an important part in the development of the idea of a rational, immaterial soul, separate from the body, an idea which was much developed by Plato; and which passed from him through Augustine to become the basis of Descartes’ dualism—though it lost, in the context of seventeenth-century mechanical science, a basic feature which it shared with all Greek ideas of ‘soul’, namely the conception that it was the presence of soul which gave living things their life. (Descartes marked the difference when he said something which Pythagoreans, Plato, Aristotle, would all equally have been unable to understand: ‘it is not that the body dies because the soul leaves it—the soul leaves it because the body has died.’)
Whatever exactly the early Pythagoreans did and believed, they did it in secret, and the concept of being initiated into a mystery applies in their case better than that of making an intervention into an open rational debate. Their existence, contemporary with the later Milesians, reminds us also of something else: that from its beginnings two motives were brought to Western philosophy which have been active alongside one another ever since, the desire for salvation and the desire to find out how things work.
We have already suggested that while the question of how far Milesian thought was philosophical is an unhelpful one, the question of how far its enquiries were rational may be a better one. There are of course various criteria of rationality, but certainly one very important expression of it is to be found in reflection, guided by general principles, on what questions require an answer. There is a very striking example of such thought in a famous argument of Anaximander, who worked in the first half of the sixth century and, according to an ancient writer, was ‘the first of the Greeks, to our knowledge, who was bold enough to publish a book on nature’.7 The argument relates to a question which bothered other Presocratics: what keeps the earth in its place? Others were to appeal to material supports of various kinds: but Anaximander argued that the earth was symmetrically placed in the centre of the universe, and thus needed no support. This argument represents an early application of a purely rational principle, the Principle of Sufficient Reason. If the earth were to move in one direction rather than another, there would have to be a reason for this, in the form of some relevant asymmetry or difference: so, if there is no such asymmetry, the earth will not move in any direction rather than another, i.e. will stay where it is. This impressive argument brings out clearly how the application of rational principle, even if it is to basically primitive cosmological materials, marks out such thought from mythological picture-making.
A different exercise of rationality, however, and a much more purely abstract one is represented by the extraordinary work of Parmenides. Parmenides expressed his philosophy in verse, a choice less eccentric than it would be now, but still a choice (the Milesians wrote in prose).The effort to express abstract and logical considerations in epic hexameters gives an intense but also strained effect, and his style was poorly viewed in antiquity. His aim throughout seems to be to achieve as much clarity as possible, and the syntactical obscurities that remain are the unintended bent to his unprecedented subject-matter. His ambiguities are thus of a very different kind from the revelatory puns of Heracleitus. Even the very little we have of Heracleitus (compared with 154 lines of Parmenides) shows that he was the more controlled and sophisticated writer; but Parmenides was attempting something quite different from him or anyone else before, 8 which was to determine the basic nature of reality entirely by argument from premisses self-evident to reflection—just one premiss, in fact, though Parmenides (fr. 5) says that it makes no difference where one starts. Whatever exactly we say about the Milesians, in this undertaking we can certainly recognize the first example of pure metaphysical reasoning: it remains one of the most ambitious.
Parmenides’ poem represents a goddess as revealing to him the true way of enquiry. What she gives as the key to the true way is this: ‘it is, and it cannot be that it is not.’ We must not try to think ‘it is not’: for ‘you could not know what is not (that is not practicable), nor speak of it (fr. 2). The same thing is there to be thought, and to be (fr. 3). What is there to be spoken of and thought, must be; for it is there to be, but nothing is not (fr. 6).’
We will leave for the moment the question of what is meant by ‘it’ in ‘it is’ and ‘it is not’ (in the Greek the verb ‘is’ stands by itself). Parmenides’ first conclusion is that there is no coherent or possible enquiry into what is not, or which uses the thought ‘it is not’; this is because ‘the same thing is there to be thought, and to be’, and what is not, nothing, is not available, so to speak, for thought. Parmenides’ ultimate backing for this radical claim is hard to recapture with total precision, and is still the subject of controversy. Some believe that the basic argument (as given in fr. 6, 1–2, the last sentence quoted above) is this: with regard to what can be thought and spoken of, it is true (at least) that it could be—and this might be conceded even by those of us who suppose that some things which can be thought and spoken of do not, as a matter of fact, exist (unicorns, for instance). But now consider: of nothing, it is not true that it could be. So a thing which can be thought and spoken of cannot be identical with nothing. But then it must be something; and so, contrary to what you first thought, must actually be.
This is at least a clear fallacy. But in the strange phrase translated as ‘is there to be’, Parmenides has a more primitive conception than this version captures, a notion of language and thought having a content only because they touch or are in contact with what is—the touching and seeing models of thought and meaning operate more directly on Parmenides’ ideas than is quite brought out by the excursion through what could be. But however exactly we are to reconstruct Parmenides’ rejection of the thought ‘it is not’, his rejection of it is clear and total, and he proceeds to deduce from that rejection, in order, a series of surprising consequences. What is can have no beginning or end; if it had, then, before or after, it would not be, and that is excluded. He adds to this proof of ‘its’ having no beginning, another based on an elegant use of the Principle of Sufficient Reason: ‘what necessity would force it, sooner or later, to come to be, if it started from nothing?’ (fr. 8, 9–10).
‘It neither was nor will be, since it is altogether now’: here Parmenides gives the first expression to an idea of eternity. His conception is not of something outside time altogether, as some later conceptions of eternity have it, something to which no temporal notions apply at all. It is now. But, equally, it is not merely indefinitely old—it has no past, and no future. Its time, such as it is, is represented as a perpetual present. ‘It’ is uniform, unchanging, has no divisions, is the same under any aspect—for to deny any of this would involve thinking that there was some place, or some time, or some respect, with regard to which it was not, and this, once more, is excluded.
Above all, there is only one of it. For ‘there is and will be nothing besides what is’ (fr. 8, 36–7)—anything else would have to be something which was not; and ‘what is’, itself, cannot consist of two distinguishable things or be divided, ‘since it all, equally, is; it is not more or less in any way . . . so it is all continuous, for what is sticks close to what is’ (fr. 8, 22–5). Once the uniqueness of ‘it’ is seen to be a conclusion of Parmenides’ argument, and not (as some earlier scholars supposed) a premiss, the question of what ‘it’ is lapses. It is just that thing, whatever it is, that we are thinking and speaking of, when we succeed in thinking and speaking of something—and Parmenides certainly supposes that we can think and speak of something, though very evidently it is not what, in our everyday error, we take ourselves to be thinking and speaking of.
The philosophical legacy of this remarkable argument is very extensive and various. The concept of eternal, unchanging, and uncreated being is one which Plato was to use in characterizing his Forms; his debt to Parmenides was explicit and acknowledged, though he had to differ from him, as he gravely concedes in the Sophist, by admitting into reality also principles of change. He differed from him already, however, about the world of unchanging being: Plato had held, from the earliest introduction of the Forms, that there were many of them, which could be intellectually distinguished. How this could be, however, is something he did not take up until in that same late dialogue, the Sophist, he directly faced the challenge of Parmenides’ proof and sought to meet it by systematically distinguishing different senses of ‘is not’.
That same attempt was also to provide the solution, as Plato hoped, to another problem which directly related to Parmenides’ argument, the problem of falsehood. To think, surely, is to think something—to think nothing is not to think at all. So what is the ‘something’ that is thought by one who thinks falsely? Thought or speech which is false cannot be nonsensical: what relation to reality is possessed by speech which has a meaning, but is not true? This problem Plato made a powerfully original attempt to solve, in the course of which he developed a distinction essential to these issues, that between a name and a statement. What is in many ways the same set of questions has recurred in increasingly sophisticated forms to the present day; and Wittgenstein’s Tractatus, a metaphysical work comparable in both boldness and abstractness to Parmenides’, takes its start from a question which implies the converse of Parmenides’ principle: ‘how can we say what is not?’
Other strains of Parmenidean influence come from his denials of plurality and change. His pupil Zeno invented a series of famous paradoxes which apparently deduce contradictions from the suppositions that there is plurality, or that motion is possible; paradoxes such as that of the Arrow, which (in its shortest form) runs thus: an arrow in flight occupies at each instant a space which is just its own length; but any body which at any time occupies just such a space is, with regard to that time, at rest; so the arrow is at rest at each instant; so it is at rest at every instant, that is to say, it does not move. These paradoxes gave rise to a complex debate which belongs as much to the history of mathematics as to philosophy, from which there emerged eventually the concepts of the continuum and of a limit. But even after mathematical techniques had been established to characterize the phenomena which Zeno thought could not be coherently characterized, there have remained philosophical problems about the application of mathematics to physical space and time in which some of Zeno’s arguments have still played a role; while the method which he invented, of generating from a set of assumptions an infinite regress (or progress)—a method which can be used either destructively, or constructively to determine some infinite set of items—has remained an essential resource of analytical thought.
Apart from difficulties for common sense from the Eleatic arguments, there were particular problems for the most advanced form of theoretical pluralism, atomism, which held that the world consisted of atoms moving in empty space—for how was totally empty space to be conceptualized to avoid the Eleatic argument (which impressed others, such as Anaxagoras) that it would have to be nothing, and hence could not exist? It seems that the first of the Atomists, Leucippus (born near the beginning of the fifth century) asserted the existence of the void against the Eleatics by saying that void is not being, yet is—a formulation which seems too much like a contradiction. Aristotle’s treatment of this subject in the Physics represents a great advance in the conceptualization of empty space, and although he himself does not accept a void, he does not include the Eleatic type of argument among the several bad arguments he uses against it. It is all the more remarkable that Descartes, in the seventeenth century, when he denied a vacuum on the basis of his own physics (which involved a close assimilation of matter and space), was able to use a startlingly Eleatic type of argument: ‘If it is asked what would be the case if God removed all the matter from a vessel and let nothing else take the place of what had been removed, then the answer must be, that the sides of the vessel would be contiguous. For if there is nothing between two bodies, they must be next to each other’ (Principles of Philosophy, ii. 18).
APPEARANCE AND REALITY
Parmenides’ poem had a further part, mostly lost, in which the goddess expounded a pluralistic cosmological theory; which, however, she was committed to regarding as nonsense, and probably advanced only as a sophisticated example of the kind of thing she had warned against at the beginning of the poem, the way of ignorant mortals, who ‘drift along, deaf and blind, amazed, in confused throngs: they think that to be and not to be are the same, and not the same’ (fr. 6, 6–9)—that is to say, they think, confusedly, that it is possible for what is here and now, not to be at other times and places. There has been much discussion of what relation Parmenides supposed the opinions of men to bear to reality as he explained it. But if that discussion tries to rest anything on what it would be consistent for Parmenides to hold, it must recognize from the beginning the important fact that there is nothing which Parmenides could consistently hold on this subject. For the opinions of men certainly change, and are different from one another: so if everything is (literally) one and (literally) nothing changes, there are no such opinions.
This point applies just as much to the true thought of the instructed philosopher. Some interpreters have claimed that Parmenides believed being and thought to be one, that nothing existed except thought (Parmenides would thus be something like an idealist, in the sense in which it was claimed earlier that no ancient philosopher was an idealist). This view is based partly on highly resistible interpretations of two ambiguous lines (fr. 3; fr. 8, 34), but also on the argument that since Parmenides thought everything was one, and agreed that there was thought, he must have supposed, not being stupid, that thought was the one thing there was. But this type of argument ignores the obliquities of the metaphysical imagination. One might as well argue that since Parmenides thought everything was one, and conceded (since he refers to himself more than once) that he existed, he must have supposed that he was the only thing there was. It is clear9 that Plato regarded himself, more than a century later, as forcing Parmenides to face the question of the existence of thought as part of reality. Let us call Parmenides’ one thing ‘It’. Then one of Plato’s points was that Parmenides agreed that there was at least a name of It; but if there is only one thing, then It must be that name; and since It is a name, then Its name must be the name of a name; so Parmenides’ theory comes out as the view that there is only one thing in reality, a name which is the name of a name.
This mildly jocular argument contains in fact both a narrower and a wider point. Since naming is, by both Parmenides and Plato, closely connected with thinking, it raises the question of thought being part of reality, a question which Plato goes on to pursue. But it raises also the general issue of what it is to take a thesis like Parmenides’ seriously. Is it, for instance, to take it literally? An Eleatic might reply that of course it was never meant to be taken in the literal way in which Plato’s argument takes it; but then the question can be pressed, as it was repeatedly pressed against metaphysical arguments by G. E. Moore in the present century, of how it is to be taken. Moore himself was burdened by a prejudice that to take something seriously was to take it literally; we do not have to agree with that, in order justifiably to demand some directions from the speculative metaphysician about how to take him seriously. One guide about how to take him seriously is provided by the direction of his arguments: but in Parmenides’ case, this gets us no further on, since his argument either proves nothing at all, or proves just that literal absurdity which Plato objected to.
Parmenides had a theory so simple and radical that, taken literally, it leaves no room even for what he regarded as correct thought. With regard to other, false, ideas, the deluded beliefs of men, and indeed the pluralistic world itself as it seems, he and his followers were disposed to relegate these to the category of ‘appearance’.10 This contrast between appearance and reality can be aligned, as it is by Parmenides (fr. 7), with a contrast between sense-perception and reason: sense-perception is deluded by mere appearance, it is the power of reason that grasps reality. But such a distinction, whatever else may be said about it, does not solve the problem that we have been pressing on Parmenides. For even if men are deluded by the senses, and appearances conceal rather than reveal reality, at least it is true that there are appearances, and any full account of what actually exists must include the actual existence of (misleading) appearances. As the English twentieth-century metaphysician F. H. Bradley insisted, appearance must itself be part of reality.
The point was seen, once more, by Plato in that late dialogue the Sophist to which we have already referred. But it was a truth which Plato himself had to learn to take as seriously as it needs to be taken. In his middle-period dialogues, above all the Republic, he had offered a picture of knowledge and reality which was itself open to this criticism, or at least was deeply ambiguous on the issue. On the one hand, there was the world of Forms, immaterial and unchanging objects of purely intellectual knowledge, which were supposed, in that simple and ambitious theory, to solve a lot of problems at once: to explain, for instance, what mathematical truths are truths about (for evidently they are not about such things as the inaccurate geometrical figures one sees on black-boards), and, at the same time, to be what give general terms a meaning. Over against these, were the objects of sense-perception and everyday belief, the things of the natural world which are mistaken for reality by the ‘lovers of sense-experience’, who are contrasted with the philosophers, the lovers of truth.
In the Republic, the distinction between these worlds is hammered home by a series of dichotomies: in the model of the Divided Line, which separates the realm of Forms from that of matter, and assigns reason to the one, the senses to the other; and in an image which has haunted European thought, which represents the philosopher’s education as a journey into the sunlight from a cave, in which ordinary men, prisoners of their prejudices, raptly watch a flickering procession of shadow images. This distinction, and the ordering of value that goes with it, Plato sometimes represents as one between ‘being’ and ‘becoming’, where ‘becoming’, we are told, is constituted by some unsatisfactory and unstable combination of being and not being. Plato was to abandon these formulations, though certainly not his belief in eternal intellectual objects.
Interpreters have not found it easy to capture exactly what Plato meant when, in the Republic and other dialogues of his middle period, he claimed ‘real being’ for the Forms, and denied it to the everyday objects of sense-perception. There is, in fact, more than one level of difficulty. There is the very general philosophical problem, which we have just touched on in the confrontation of Parmenides and Moore, of giving a sense to metaphysical assertions which deny the reality of some large and evident dimension of experience. Problems of that general sort are still with us. But there is also an historical problem, of understanding those particular metaphysical formulations which belong to a time before the development of any systematic logical theory, and which we are particularly likely to misrepresent in the light of later conceptions. Beyond that again, there is a very specific historical problem of understanding Plato, who seems himself to have become dissatisfied with some of these formulations and to have become, in his later work, a critic of his earlier self. If Plato became dissatisfied with these formulations, there is really not much reason to suppose that they ever had some fully determinate sense which we could now recover: it is rather that Plato is one of those who helped to put us into a position from which these formulations may be seen to have no fully determinate sense at all.
His later dissatisfaction with what he had said in the Republic lay in some part in technical issues about the idea of being: certainly he came to a clearer understanding of that notion, and also to a more patient and analytical conception of the kind of philosophical enquiry that such an understanding demanded. Related developments away from a simple Republic image occurred, as we shall see, in Plato’s conception of knowledge.
It may be also that, more broadly, he became less governed by images of the rational mind being clogged or imprisoned by the empirical world. Those images themselves, it must be said, always stood in an uneasy relationship to another kind of picture which at the same time he offered of the material world, equally unfavourable to it, but in a contrary direction—that it was evanescent, flimsy, only appearance. The world of matter had to be ultimately powerless but at the same time destructively powerful, two conflicting aspects which stand to one another as the shadows of the Cave stand to the fetters which bind its prisoners. Such tensions express something very real in Plato’s outlook (notably, his own deep ambivalence towards political power, and towards art), but their theoretical costs, for so ambitious a theory, are high, and Plato seems to have become aware of them.
The Republic theory, however, refuses to go away; it is perhaps Plato’s most famous doctrine, and besides its appearances in history and literature as ‘the Platonic philosophy’, it itself, or at least its terminology, has recurred in many forms. Its tensions themselves help to explain how it keeps a hold on the philosophical imagination; and here one factor to be mentioned—which particularly relates to the associated Platonic doctrine of love, expressed in the Symposium—is that there is a constant and vivid contrast, in these middle-period works, between Plato’s world-denying theories and his literary presentation of them. The resonance of his images and the imaginative power of his style, the most beautiful ever devised for the expression of abstract thought, implicitly affirm the reality of the world of senses even when the content denies it.
A more general point is that it is only philosophers and historians of philosophy who worry much about what is entailed by a theory such as that of the Republic when it is taken strictly. Others—artists, scientists—get what they need out of it, and if Plato’s theory is taken broadly enough, much more can be got from it than is strictly in it. That includes the rationalist spirit so important to the seventeenth-century scientific revolution, which we have already referred to in the person of Galileo, the spirit which sought an underlying mathematical structure under the flux of appearances. It is clear how this can be thought to be in the spirit of Plato’s Republic; it is clear also how it contradicts what is actually said there, since Plato quite explicitly says that there is no hope at all of giving a scientific account of the material world. His message is, and quite clearly, not that physics should be mathematical, but that one should give up physics and pursue mathematics. If philosophers are going to be influential, it is as well that they should be misunderstood.
KNOWLEDGE AND SCEPTICISM
Not all philosophical thought that regards reality as different from appearances need be as drastically dismissive of appearances as Parmenides, or the Republic taken strictly. It may rather encourage, like the Republic taken loosely, some rationalistic, perhaps scientific method for uncovering the reality from the appearances. One important difference between these attitudes is that the rationalist programme which finds an intellectual order under appearances may also find it to be, to some extent, systematically related to appearances, so that discovery of the hidden order can lead to control of what happens even as it appears: all control of the environment which is grounded in physical theory is of this character.
The fact that the view of the Republic was not really of this kind presented a serious difficulty to Plato. He was not, of course, interested in physical technology; but he was concerned with social technology, and the dream of the Republic is that philosophers, who have seen the truth about reality, would return to the Cave and, after their intellectual sight had adjusted to the darkness of empirical life, would be able to order things better than those who had never left. But despite some hopeful references to the paradigm that they carry in their memory, he does not provide enough to bridge the disjunction between the two worlds, and, as we shall see rather later, the theory of knowledge which he offers is unable to help in the basic task of political education.
The search for a coherent theory of how scientific knowledge might be possible was a preoccupation of some late-fifth-century thinkers. Anaxagoras had said (fr. 21A) that appearances were ‘a glimpse of the hidden’, and for this he was praised by Democritus, who evidently struggled with these questions. Democritus took the point that while sense-perception could be misleading, and thought had in some sense to get behind appearances, nevertheless it was only with the help of other perceptions that this could be done: ‘colour, sweetness, bitterness, these are matters of convention’, he interestingly said (fr. 125), ‘and what there is in truth are atoms and the void’; but he represented the senses as replying, ‘Poor mind, are you going to overthrow us when you take your beliefs from us? If you throw us, you fall over.’
In trying to resolve the epistemological problems of atomism (and we do not know how far he got), Democritus was facing not only the Eleatics, who thought that they knew something incompatible with his atomism, but also a range of Sophists who thought that they had arguments against anyone’s knowing anything at all—or at least, anything of a theoretical, general, or scientific character. The inconclusive speculations of the earlier Presocratics, and in particular the mind-numbing conclusions of Eleatic logic, served to encourage attitudes of scepticism.
A general sense that certainty, at least on any large or speculative issue, is impossible, is itself an early phenomenon. But the Sophists, or some of them, pursued a more aggressive line against philosophical theory of any kind and the use of dialectic to support it; wishing in this to advance their own claims to teach something useful, in the form of rhetoric and the all-important power to persuade in the courts and the political assembly—activities in which, as they agreed with their critics, scrupulous logical demonstration was not at a premium. The arguments used in these attacks on the possibility of knowledge seem now a mixture of almost childish muddles or tricks, and penetrating insights into real difficulties; a few arguments embody both at once, as some of those recorded in Plato’s Euthydemus, or found in a rather rough and ready compilation of dialectical material called the Dissoi Logoi or ‘Double Arguments’, which is generally taken to date from this period. We do not know how far Protagoras himself developed the positions which Plato ascribes to him, offering a relativized view of truth and knowledge, by which what seems to each man is true for him: but we do know that Democritus used against him, and may have invented, a form of argument which was to be very important in the later history of scepticism and the theory of knowledge. This form of argument is called the peritrope or ‘reversal’, and consists in applying a philosopher’s criterion of knowledge, truth, or meaningfulness to his own statements—in this case, asking Protagoras whether his own thesis is supposed to be (non-relatively) true.
Some of the material which survives from these early excursions into scepticism seems naïve—naïve, that is, not just by some arbitrary standard of later logical theory, but by the contemporary standards of insight set by Herodotus or Thucydides or, differently, Sophocles—adult persons, compared (it seems) with clever children. The point is not about the individual psychological fact, of the talents or maturity of Sophists compared with those of historians or tragedians; the question is about the social fact, that these arguments were capable of genuinely impressing and bewildering the Sophists’ contemporaries. The basic question is, as Nietzsche unforgettably said about Socrates, how did they get away with it? Here it is important to remember the gap that always exists between intelligent practice and the theoretical reflective understanding of that practice; and, more particularly, how utterly puzzling the theory of reasoning must have seemed at this point. On the one hand, there existed already startling intellectual achievements in mathematics, and some systematic thought about such subjects as medicine made sense; while, even more evidently, the practice of argument in everyday life could be seen to rest on some assumptions about the connexions between proof and truth—at the very least it was possible to show a person through dialectical refutation that he was contradicting himself and must be wrong somewhere. But at the same time, the Eleatic arguments—which were in fact deep and powerful—led to impossible results; it seemed that one could prove anything. Many other invalid arguments, neither deep nor powerful, could not be decisively shown up because no systematic vocabulary of logical criticism yet existed. The fundamental achievements of Plato and Aristotle in setting logic and the philosophy of language on their feet can conceal from us how random and unstructured reflective logical thought was before the fourth century.
Plato and Aristotle sought foundations for philosophical and (in Aristotle’s case at least) scientific enquiry which would resist scepticism. Aristotle’s theory of knowledge is complex, and no general account of it will be attempted here. It judiciously combined appeal to some intuitively or self-evidently known principles, with an important role for sense-experience. It also made a very characteristic appeal to the consensus of informed and thoughtful persons: Aristotle champions a programme which applies equally to metaphysics, ethics, and science, of considering and seeking to reconcile the views of the best authorities, and when he says that one’s theory should accord with ta phainomena, ‘the appearances’, he includes in that not only data of observation, and what competent speakers would be disposed to say, but also, at least presumptively, existing well-entrenched theoretical opinions. The weight of proof, for Aristotle, is against those who would try to unseat such a consensus. Even granted that the strength of the presumption is not necessarily very strong, so that Aristotle can throw it over with some ease if he thinks he has a strong argument; granted, too, the element of pre-selection that Aristotle exercises in what is to count as a worthwhile opinion; nevertheless, the fact that he can hope to find any soil in which to ground such a method shows how far things have travelled by his time from the age of the Sophists.
For Aristotle, the advance of knowledge is a collective and on-going enterprise, to which earlier thinkers, unless too exotic, primitive, or capricious, can be seen as contributors. That idea exists powerfully today in the conception of a scientific community, whose practitioners are recruited through an apprenticeship in experimental and observational techniques, and again there is a presumption in favour of expert consensus. But in a world where there were few experimental techniques, the question of who was to be counted as part of the informed consensus was interpreted differently, and there was a strong pull towards intellectual activity coming to be seen (as it scarcely was by Aristotle, but was by many later) as the scholastic undertaking of harmonizing the contents of authoritative books.
This methodological respect for an informed consensus provides a contrast between Aristotle’s outlook and Plato’s, something which emerges in particularly stark terms with regard to ethics. But there is another set of beliefs about knowledge which they share, and which has been of the greatest importance for the history of philosophy: beliefs which represent knowledge as, in more than one way, quite special, and in particular very different from mere belief or opinion, even true opinion. One idea of this kind is that real knowledge, as opposed to random true belief, should form a system, should be theoretically organized in a way which itself corresponds revealingly to the structure of the subject-matter. This idea relates most directly to an ideal body of scientific knowledge, an ideal which Plato (in relation to philosophy and mathematics) did much to form, and Aristotle carried much further. It can be seen, however, also as a condition on what it is for a particular person to know anything. It represents a person’s thought as real knowledge only insofar as that thought approximates to the system—the knower is the savant, one in whom some part of the ideal body of theoretical knowledge is realized.
This requirement leaves out, needless to say, a good deal of what in everyday acceptance would count as knowledge. This divergence is increased when there is added a further idea, that organized theoretical knowledge can be had only of an unchanging subject-matter, that contingent and particular and changeable matters of fact are no subject for science. Taken together, these ideas yield the conclusion that no person’s thought can strictly and properly be said to be knowledge unless it relates to a necessary and unchanging subject-matter. This conclusion—and there are other routes to it besides this—exerted a notable fascination on both Plato and Aristotle, and has since recurred in philosophy more than once.
In Plato’s thought, a development on this subject can very clearly be followed. In the Meno, a dialogue which marks a boundary between the early and the middle period of his work, his views are in a rich and un-stable solution. Faced with a sophistic puzzle about how it is possible to learn anything at all, he introduces for the first time the doctrine of anamnesis or ‘recollection’, which represents the process of learning as the recovery of opinions already in the soul but forgotten. In the dialogue, this process (or, more strictly, its earlier steps) is illustrated by a scene in which Socrates elicits from a slave-boy, by questioning, assent to a geometrical truth of which the boy had no conscious idea before. A great deal could be said about this famous doctrine, and the Pythagorean ideas of pre-existence, reincarnation, and immortality which Plato attached to it, sketchily in the Meno, but more extensively in the Phaedo. The present point, however, concerns only one feature of it: that as an account of learning, it could not really look appropriate to anything except a necessary or a priori subject-matter, such as mathematics. There is indeed something which is striking and demands explanation in the fact that one can elicit from a pupil, by argument, mathematical conclusions which have never occurred to him before; but no amount of Socratic questioning could elicit from anyone a set of particular facts of geography or history which he had not already, in the mundane sense, learned. The reader of the Meno, however, finds that Socrates seems to hold also all of the following: that knowledge can be acquired only by such ‘recollection’; that there is a distinction between knowledge and mere true belief; and that this last distinction can be applied not only to mathematics, but also to contingent matters—we can distinguish between a man who knows the way to Larissa and a man who merely has true beliefs about it. If we accept the obvious fact that ‘recollection’ does not apply to such matters (and it is not entirely clear whether the Meno accepts that point or not), these claims produce an inconsistency.
However it may be with the Meno, there is no such inconsistency in the Republic, where Plato makes it clear that for him the distinction between knowledge and belief is a difference of subject-matter: they relate to those two ontological worlds represented by the Divided Line. This neat coordination, however, leads to absurd conclusions, compounded by the fact that at this stage Plato has no adequate theory of error. The consequence that there is no empirical knowledge presents a problem, of which we have already seen the outline in discussing the Cave, of how the philosophers’ knowledge can play any constructive role in this world at all; for to apply knowledge to this world requires propositions which are about this world, and if no such proposition can ever be more than believed, then it is incurably obscure how the philosopher kings’ knowledge can, with regard to the empirical world (which is where, reluctantly, they rule), make them better off than others. Not only can there be no empirical knowledge—equally there can, strictly speaking, be no mathematical or other a priori belief, and the situation of apprentice or lucky mathematicians (let alone mistaken ones), which had been discussed in the Meno, becomes indescribable. Plato has, indeed, got a place in his classification for something roughly analogous to a priori belief, but that, interestingly, concerns not so much individual knowers or believers, as the status of a whole subject, the partially axiomatized mathematics of his day, which he believed to lack foundations.
In his later work Plato went back to the view that knowledge and belief could relate to the same subject-matter, and he may very well have accepted that there was empirical knowledge. The Republic represents the high-water mark for him of a theory of knowledge controlled by the categories of subject-matter, by the ideal of a body of a priori knowledge, rather than by questions about what has to be true of someone who knows something (as contrasted, for instance, with someone who merely believes that same thing). This emphasis in the Republic deeply defeats Plato’s own purposes. Plato’s anxious question, to which he repeatedly came back, and to which the Republic was supposed to give the great answer, was how moral knowledge could be institutionalized and effective in society, as opposed either to the rhetoric of the Sophists, or to the unreasoned and hence vulnerable perceptions of conservative tradition. Knowledge had to be present in society in the form of persons who knew, and who commanded an effective theory of education. Real knowledge, and the ability to impart it—or rather elicit it—went together.
This idea helped in the understanding of the life of Socrates, for it served to join something which Socrates admitted, that he had no knowledge, with something that had to be admitted about him, that his influence did not necessarily make his friends better: it was a fact, which contributed to Socrates’ condemnation, that among his associates were such men as the brilliant deserter, Alcibiades, and Critias, prominent among the Thirty Tyrants. Plato’s theory of effective moral education was meant to complete the work, and the apology, of Socrates. The Republic’s account of knowledge seems at first to yield just such a theory; but in fact it totally fails to do so. It says quite a lot about what it is for a body of propositions to be knowledge, and something about what it is for a person to acquire such knowledge, but it says ultimately nothing about the cognitive difference that that process is supposed to make to a person’s handling of matters in the everyday world which, by ontological necessity, lie outside that body of knowledge altogether.
There is another way in which knowledge can seem to make quite special demands. This arises from considering the standards which should govern personal or individual knowledge; whereas the last line of thought was more concerned with the question of what constitutes an impersonal body of scientific theory. More intimate to the concept of knowledge itself, it was equally started in Greek reflection, and has played an even more prominent part in subsequent theory of knowledge. This is the idea that knowledge implies certainty; that an individual cannot be said to know a thing unless he is certain of it, where that implies not only that he feels utterly sure of it, but that—in some sense which it has been a repeated undertaking of philosophy to try to make clear—he could not, granted the evidence he has, be wrong.
This is not, as some modern philosophers have implied, a merely arbitrary condition on knowledge. It is a quite natural suggestion to arise from reflection on knowledge; by more than one route, perhaps, but one could be the following. Obviously, there is a distinction between knowing a thing, and being right about it by luck—even ordinary speech, which is lax about ascriptions of knowledge, distinguishes between knowing and guessing correctly (even where the guesser actually believes his guess). But now consider the condition of a man who believes on ample evidence that a given thing is true, but whose evidence is such that he might still be wrong. Then even if he is not wrong, that seems to be, relative to his state of mind, ultimately luck. Here we can take the case of two men, each of whom has, on two different occasions, exactly the same kind and amount of evidential basis for his belief in a certain kind of fact; but, as it happens, one is right and the other is wrong. There is real pressure to say that the one who, luckily, was right, did not really know, and a natural English phrase marks this exactly, when it is said of him that for all he knew he might have been wrong. By this kind of argument, it can be plausibly claimed that so long as one’s evidence falls short in any way of conclusive certainty, one does not, even if one is right, really know.
It is just possible that this powerfully influential line of argument was sketched out near the beginning of Greek philosophy, by the poet Xenophanes of Colophon (born about the middle of the sixth century), who wrote lines which can be translated (fr. 34):
No man has discerned certain truth, nor will there be any who knows about the gods and all the other things I say: for even if by chance he says what is totally correct, yet he himself does not know it; appearance (or opinion) holds over all.
Plato in the Meno apparently refers to this as expressing the sceptical view that knowledge is unattainable because you would not know when you had attained it—which is another version of the demand for certainty. But Plato may have been wrong about Xenophanes’ meaning; the sense is much disputed, but it is most probable11 that he speaks only of a distinction, itself very important to Greek thought, between what one has seen for oneself or established at first hand, and what can only be the subject of inference, such as questions about the gods. But besides some good reasons for so taking it, one bad one has been advanced:12 that on the view of the lines as expressing a general sceptical point, there is no way in which the second sentence could stand as a reason for the first— it would rather have to be a consequence. On the contrary, the second sentence might express a subtle and powerful reason for the first—‘noone knows about these things, because if he did know, it would have to be more than luck that he was right, which it cannot be.’ The trouble about this as an interpretation of Xenophanes is not that it is too weak an argument, but rather that it is, by a century or so, too sophisticated.
But what Xenophanes probably did not say was eventually said. The requirement of strong certainty having been deduced from the concept of knowledge, a variety of thinkers took the step of claiming that strong certainty, and hence knowledge, were not to be had. Plato attempted to answer such a sceptical conclusion, while sharing the premiss that knowledge demanded strong certainty. But the negative view recurred, and it is interesting that it was, much later, members of the school that Plato founded, the Academy, who made some of the more interesting contributions to the rather episodic intellectual movement which is called Scepticism.
Our knowledge of ancient Scepticism comes in good part from the writings of an undistinguished medical writer of the second century A.D. called Sextus Empiricus. Sextus himself belongs not to the Academic school of scepticism, but to that called ‘Pyrrhonian’, after Pyrrho of Elis (c. 360–275 B.C.); Pyrrho himself is a shadowy figure, whose views came to Sextus as reported and amplified by his pupil Timon and other writers. Later Pyrrhonism inherited from the Academic Arcesilaus the technique of laying alongside any set of evidences or supposedly convincing argument another with contrary effect, in order to induce total suspension of assent—an attitude which was expressed in a phrase which already had an earlier history in philosophy: ou mallon ‘no more this than that’. The aim of this technique was practical, to achieve that state of mind which more than one ancient school made its aim, ataraxia, quietude of mind or freedom from disturbance.
The Pyrrhonists were careful to withhold assent even from the claim that there was no knowledge; they recognized that, expressed dogmatically, it would be open to the peritrope or charge of self-refutation, and this very reflection helped them to get rid of that dogma along with others. The sceptical proposition, they said, was like the purge which ‘does not merely eliminate the humours from the body, but expels itself along with them’.13 Correspondingly, the slogan ‘no more . . .’ was to be taken, not as a theoretical statement or the right answer to a theoretical question, but as an element in a practice which leads to the same state as having the right answer would lead to, if there were such a thing as having the right answer. Ataraxia followed, for the Pyrrhonists, not on answering fundamental questions, but on being induced to give up asking them. They illustrated the point with a story of the painter Apelles, who, despairing of being able to paint a horse’s foam, flung his sponge at the canvas, which produced the effect of a horse’s foam.
The later Pyrrhonists criticized the Academic school, of which the outstanding figure was Carneades (c. 213–129 B.C.), for being less prudent in withholding assent, and accused them of dogmatism, for asserting definitely that there was no knowledge. It is clear that Carneades worked very directly on the conception of knowledge as entailing certainty. His target, and the focus of his problems, was set for him by the theory of knowledge advanced by the Stoic school, which had been founded c. 305 B.C. by a gruff eccentric, Zeno of Citium. The theory had been developed in the late third century by a figure important in the history of logic, Chrysippus. (A line of verse said of him that if he had not existed, neither would the Stoic school, and equally elegantly Carneades added, ‘if Chrysippus had not existed, neither would I.’) The Stoics’ theory of knowledge cannot be discussed here, but it is notable for pursuing quite directly the requirements which follow from the argument set out earlier against ‘luck’: needing, as they believed, some certain criterion of truth, they had recourse to a supposedly self-validating state of mind, one which would eliminate the possibility that what was assented to could be false. They introduced the concept of a ‘kataleptic impression’—a form of conviction which was supposedly both subjectively indubitable and objectively unerring. It was this that Carneades attacked, by trying to show that no impression which had the first of these characteristics could be guaranteed to have the second. This was the first enactment of a dispute which was to become central to much modern philosophy, above all through Descartes’ appeal, in his notion of a ‘clear and distinct perception’, to what is, in effect, a kataleptic intellectual impression.
The views of ancient Sceptics are not altogether easy to reconstruct from the accounts, rambling and sometimes inconsistent, offered by second- or third-rate thinkers such as Sextus or Cicero. To some, and varying, degrees they were actually sceptics, denying the possibility of knowledge or indeed of truth, or Pyrrhonianly withholding assent even from these denials. But at the same time there were strains, particularly in Carneades, of what would in modern philosophy rather be called empiricism or positivism, which ascribes certainty only to statements about impressions of sense or subjective appearances, and emphasizes verifiability, the probabilistic character of all empirical inference, and the heuristic uselessness of deduction ( J. S. Mill’s criticism of syllogistic inference as circular was anticipated by ancient Scepticism). It may be that to Greek thinkers the two strains of scepticism and of radical empiricism seemed more closely associated than they do in modern philosophy, where radical empiricism has sometimes been invoked (as by Berkeley) precisely against scepticism. But to Greek thought the distinction between appearance and reality was so basic, and knowledge so associated with reality, that knowledge which was merely of subjective appearances perhaps did not count as genuine knowledge at all. This is a large subject, 14 but if this line of argument is correct, it illustrates once more a point made before, that subjective idealism was not a view which occurred to the Greeks.
What is certain is that both the empiricist and the more purely sceptical strains in ancient Scepticism were to be of great importance later. Sextus Empiricus was destined to be one of the most influential of Greek philosophical writers. The translation into Latin and printing of his works (1562, 1569) coincided with an intellectual crisis precipitated by the Reformation about the criterion of religious faith, and it has been shown15 how sceptical arguments from Sextus became important instruments in subsequent controversies. The weapons of scepticism were used both against, and in defence of, traditional religious faith. One style of defence was expressed by Montaigne, who emphasized the inability of man to reach knowledge, and his pretensions in trying to do so; among the innumerable considerations assembled to support this outlook are the arguments of ancient scepticism. A fideistic, unfanatical attachment to traditional religious belief emerges as the basis of the life of ataraxia. As he winningly puts it in his celebrated Apologie de Raymond Sebond: ‘La peste de l’homme, c’est l’opinion de sçavoir. Voilà pourquoy l’ignorance nous est tant recommandée par nostre religion comme pièce propre à la créance et à l’obeïssance.’
In sharp contrast is the attitude of Descartes, whose use of the armoury of sceptical devices in his Method of Doubt was designed to be preemptive, and to enable him to arrive at certainties which, as he put it, ‘the most extravagant hypotheses of the sceptics could not over-throw’. Descartes goes through doubt, not to give up philosophy, but to establish it. Finding certainties, as he supposes, first about himself as a rational soul, then about God, then about the structure of the physical world, he attempts a project which is, in effect, to reverse the relation of Carneades to the Stoics: he advances beyond doubt to a new form of kataleptic impression, and it is significant that among his first and basic certainties are those about subjective states of mind which, we have suggested, neither the Stoics nor the Sceptics regarded very highly as truths about reality. But both Descartes’ conception of certainty, and still more some of the propositions which he regarded as certain and which were essential to his system, lacked kataleptic effect on his critics, and Descartes’ fundamental achievement, contrary to his hopes, was to help to radicalize doubt, not to eliminate it.
When Montaigne said that Christianity should be taken on faith, because all arguments defeat one another, he almost certainly meant what he said; when Hume and Bayle, in the eighteenth century, spoke in similar terms, they did not. By that time, Pyrrhonian ataraxia was to be found not in Christianity, but in as little enthusiasm as possible for any religious issue. In cultivating that, as much against militant atheists as against zealots of the Church, Hume was a genuinely Pyrrhonian thinker, as also in his conservative social views; and besides the standard sceptical material which he used, a basic element in his epistemology, the theory of ‘natural belief’, can be found crudely prefigured in Sextus.
Hume and the ancient Pyrrhonians had something else in common. For all of them, the rejection of philosophy was the eventual rejection of philosophy, and ataraxia a state of mind achieved by working at sceptical considerations and then letting natural belief have its sway, so that one ends up living calmly by the customs of one’s society (or, rather, by some critical liberalization of them). These thinkers would not have been impressed by the suggestion that it might have been simpler never to have started reflecting at all; or if they express envy for those innocent of reflection, this attitude is formed and expressed at a level of self-consciousness which does not invite the reader to take it simply as it stands. Some, and notably the ancients, believed that people who had never embarked on any reflection did not in general experience ataraxia, but were rent by passions and prejudice; but even those who were less sure of that would not have favoured an educational or psychological regime which produced the benefits of a passionless rationality by entirely unphilosophical means. Scepticism remained an intellectual posture, and for all these thinkers, the Pyrrhonian outlook was both a minority state and (what is not quite the same thing) an achievement. The Pyrrhonist had, in relation to the rest of society, the role of a sage: a very quiet one.
This is one of several reasons why this posture is no longer possible. There is in modern society no serious role of a sage, as opposed to those of the expert, the commentator, or the entertainer. There is also no serious point of view, or at least none which can be publicly sustained, by which wars, calamities, and social upheaval can be quite so distantly regarded as Scepticism suggested they should be. Again, outlooks shaped by Romanticism and by modern psychological theory demand a deeper view of the emotions than Pyrrhonism had, and a more sceptical view of ataraxia itself. These points are well, if negatively illustrated by the thought of Bertrand Russell, whose philosophical stance in the theory of knowledge was, broadly, that of a twentieth-century Humean, but who notably failed to reconcile his social and moral concerns with his theoretical scepticism about ethics, or the strength of his feelings with his understanding of the mind. A book about Russell was called The Passionate Sceptic; while there could still be some outlook to which that phrase applied, it is notable, and a significant comment on Russell’s own difficulties, that in the terms of ancient or even Humean Pyrrhonism, it is a contradiction in terms.
ETHICAL ENQUIRY
‘The discussion is not about any chance question, ’ Socrates says towards the end of Book I of the Republic (352D), ‘but about what way one should live.’ The discussion was with the sophist Thrasymachus, who had claimed that it was only ever a second-best situation in which a man had reason to act in accordance with the requirements of dikaiosune—‘justice’ as we necessarily translate it, though in the Republic it covers a wide ground, and relates to all aspects of being concerned for others’ interests as well as one’s own. One often does have, according to Thrasymachus, a reason, as things are, for acting in this way, but this is only be-cause one’s power is limited—typically, by the greater power of another; one whose power was not so limited would have no such reason, and would be a lunatic if he put others’ interests before his own. This view Socrates sets out to refute. Discontented with what he offers against Thrasymachus, and confronted rather later with a more sophisticated version of this kind of thesis, he is represented by Plato as spending the rest of the Republic in giving the ultimate answer to it.
Although the speaker is Socrates, and although the question of what exactly in the Platonic Socrates was Socratic is still unanswered, 16 there would be much agreement that the Republic’s answer was Platonic, but the problem was Socratic. It was a problem raised by Sophistic scepticism, a form of it more genuinely alarming than scepticism about cosmological speculation or logic, for in this case there existed recognizable and possibly attractive alternatives to the considerations displaced by sceptical criticism.
The nub of the sceptical attack was that there was no inherent reason for anyone to promote or respect anyone else’s interests, and that the belief that there was such a reason was the product of various kinds of illusion: in particular, it stemmed from an innocent failure to see that the rules and requirements on people’s conduct which were found in different societies obtained only ‘by convention’, a concept which for the Sophistic critics meant that such rules were social products, about which it could be asked whose interest they served. There were, on the other hand, perfectly good ‘natural’ motives to self-interested conduct, and this was well illustrated by the behaviour of agents where there was no such frame-work of convention, notably by the behaviour of one city-state to another—a set of considerations brilliantly and grimly represented in the famous ‘Melian dialogue’ in Book 5 of Thucydides’ History.
Part of the problem was set by this kind of use of the concepts of ‘nature’ (phusis) and ‘convention’ (nomos), 17 and the attendant question of what kind of life it was ‘naturally’ rational to live; together with the suggestion that it was ‘naturally’ rational to pursue self-interest, the ideally satisfying forms of life being represented, in some of the more uninhibited expositions, in terms of sheer gangsterism. Thrasymachus offers this kind of picture; at this level what is in question is not only an entirely egoistic conception of practical rationality, but also a very simple schedule of egoistic satisfactions, in terms of power, wealth, and sex.18 This set of considerations just in itself yields the materials of fear and envy, rather than any on-going structure of social relations, and indeed Thrasymachus’ view, reduced totally to these elements, turns out to be even descriptively quite inadequate for any account of society.
However, this picture was superimposed on, and derived some appeal from, something different: a picture of a certain kind of social morality, which does offer some impersonal criteria of who is to be admired and respected, but finds them particularly in certain kinds of competitive success and inherited position—an aristocratic or feudal morality. It was from the context of such a social morality that the fifth and fourth centuries inherited the concept of arete, ‘personal excellence’ (the standard translation of this term as ‘virtue’ is only sometimes appropriate, and can be drastically misleading). This term carried with it certain associations which Plato, and probably Socrates, made strong efforts to detach from it: in particular, the notion of being well thought of and spoken of, cutting a good figure. Here a vital term is kalos, ‘fine’, ‘noble’, ‘splendid’, a word more strongly aesthetic than agathos, ‘good’, and an important term of commendation, but bearing with it implications of how one is regarded; as its opposite, aischros, ‘base’ or ‘shameful’, carries implications of being despised or shunned.
The deeds that made one admired if one was a Homeric hero were typically but not exclusively individual feats of arms, and one’s arete was displayed in such. One could be shamed and lose repute not only by failing in such feats, but by being mistreated—such things led to the anger of Achilles and the suicide of Ajax. What happened to one mattered for one’s esteem as well as what one did, and among things one did, competitive success ranked high: all this, of course, among those who themselves ranked high, for women and members of lower orders had other aretai and kinds of repute. In this area, there are two importantly different points, which discussion of this subject has often confused. One is that, for such a morality, shame is a predominant notion, and a leading motive the fear of disgrace, ridicule, and the loss of prestige. A different point is that excellence is displayed in competitive and self-assertive exploits. While socially and psychologically these two things often go together, they are independent of each other: in particular, the occasion of shame and disgrace may be a failure to act in some expected self-sacrificing or cooperative manner. The confusion of these two things is encouraged by measuring Greek attitudes by the standard of a Christian, and more particularly of a Protestant, outlook. That outlook associates morality simultaneously with benevolence, self-denial, and innerdirectedness or guilt (shame before God or oneself). It sees the development of moral thought to this point as progress, and it tends to run together a number of different ideas which have been discarded—or at least rendered less reputable—by that progress.
The ideas of arete, shame and reputation, were of course much older notions than the self-interest conceptions of the Sophists and the simply reductive social theory that went with those. Insofar as these Sophistic speakers (and, still more, conventional persons influenced by them, such as Meno) appeal to notions of arete, and offer for impersonal admiration the ideal of a man of power, they are in fact expressing ethical conceptions which have an aristocratic structure in itself old-fashioned by the end of the fifth century; but these conceptions have been given a new, opportunistic, content, and detached from the base in traditional society which had originally made them part of a working social morality.
This structure of ideas is thus more old-fashioned than another theory presented in the Republic, the theory offered by Glaucon and Adeimantus in Book 2. This represents the conventions of justice not as a device of the strong to exploit the weak (which was Thrasymachus’ formulation), but as a contractual device of the weak to protect themselves against the strong. This theory, only sketched in the Republic, is the prototype of many which view public norms as the solution to a problem which would now be expressed in the language of games-theory. It reaches, in fact, outside the most characteristic terms of Greek ethical theory, concerned as that was with arete. In two important respects, it resembles modern Utilitarian and contractual theories. First, the notion of a rule or practice is more fundamental in this theory than notions of character or personal excellence. Second, the desires which are served by the institutions of justice and, generally, the practices of morality are in the first instance self-interested desires: morality is represented as a device for promoting egoistic satisfactions which could in principle occur without it, but which are as a matter of fact unlikely to do so because of everyone’s weak position in an amoral state of nature.
This instrumental or contractual view of morality was rejected by Socrates, Plato, and Aristotle. It is in many ways different from the crude Thrasymachean outlook—indeed, in expression it is its opposite. Yet for Plato it shared a basic fault with that outlook: morality was represented by both as an instrument for the satisfaction of non-moral, selfish desires which existed naturally in independence of morality. This was not just a moralizing prejudice on Plato’s part, a desire for the moral motivations to appear more dignified. Still less was it the expression of an idea, later insisted on by Kant, that there can be no reason for moral conduct at all, except that it is one’s duty—that the very nature of morality requires it to consist in a completely autonomous demand which cannot be rationalized or explained by anything else. The point for Plato was precisely that there had to be a reason for moral conduct, but that no theory of the instrumental kind could provide it. A theory of morality, in his view, had to answer Sophistic scepticism by showing that it was rational for each person to want to be just, whatever his circumstances. The contractual theory failed in this respect: if one were powerful and intelligent and luckily-enough placed, it would cease to be rational for one to conform to the conventional requirements of morality. This is readily admitted by Glaucon and Adeimantus in the dialogue; indeed, they basically agree with the Platonic Socrates in viewing the contractual theory, not as an answer to Sophistic scepticism about morality, but rather as a more sophisticated expression of that scepticism.
The contractual solution was particularly weak because it was unstable relative to a superior agent, one more intelligent, resourceful, and persuasive than the average. It was above all for that kind of agent that Plato thought that the sceptical demand had to be met, and the objectives of morality and justice shown to be rational. The life of Alcibiades had been scepticism in action, and the answer had to apply to a man of his superior powers. Here the first feature, too, of the contractual theory had to be rejected, the view that notions of character came second to the notions of a desirable or useful practice. The demand to show to each man that justice was rational for him meant that the answer had to be grounded first in an account of what sort of person it was rational for him to be. If anything outside the soul (as Socrates and Plato said) or outside the self (as we might put it) is what primarily has moral value—some rule, for instance, or institution—then we are left with a possible contingency, that there could be a man whose deepest needs and the state of whose soul were such that it would not be rational for him to act in accordance with that rule or institution; and so long as that contingency remains possible, the task that Socrates and Plato set themselves will not have been carried out.
It has been said by Kantian critics that Platonic morality is egoistic, in a sense incompatible with the real character of morality. This misses the point. It is formally egoistic, in the sense that it supposes that it has to show that each man has good reason to act morally, and that the good reason has to appeal to him in terms of something about himself, how and what he will be if he is a man of that sort of character. But it is not egoistic in the sense of trying to show that morality serves some set of individual satisfactions which are well defined antecedently to it. The aim was not, given already an account of the self and its satisfactions, to show how morality (luckily) fitted them; it was to give an account of the self into which morality fitted.
For Plato, as also for Aristotle, it was a trivial truth that if it is rational for one to pursue a certain course of life or to be a certain sort of person, then those things must make for a satisfactory state of oneself called eudaimonia—a term which can only be translated as ‘happiness’. But not everyone now will regard it as a triviality, or even as true, that it is only rational to do what in the end makes for one’s own happiness. Moreover, many people who do agree that that is true will not in fact be agreeing with the same thing as Plato and Aristotle meant. These facts are due not only to imperfections of that translation, but also to changes in views of life—changes which themselves have no doubt affected our understanding of the term ‘happiness’. A proper charting of the complex relations of these words would involve a whole history of Western ethical thought. What is certain is that eudaimonia did not necessarily imply the maximization of pleasure; and when Plato, supposedly having shown in the Republic that justice is the proper state of the soul, goes on to argue that the life of the just man is also a large number of times more pleasant than that of the unjust, this is meant to be an entirely additional consideration. It is in this respect much like Kant’s assurance that virtue will be rewarded in an after-life, coming as that does after his insistence that it must be regarded as its own reward (a manoeuvre which Schopenhauer disobligingly compared to slipping a tip to a head-waiter who pretends to be above such things). The state of eudaimonia should be interpreted as that of living as a man best could, and when one finds some Greek thinkers suggesting that one can attain eudaimonia although one is the victim of torture, the linguistic strain that is undoubtedly set up expresses not just a semantic difficulty, but, under that, the substantial difficulty of supposing that being tortured is compatible with living as one best could.
The Platonic aim, then, can be seen as this, to give a picture of the self such that if one properly understands what one is, one will see that a life of justice is not external to the self, but an objective which it must be rational for one to pursue. That is the sense of Socrates’ question with which we started, about the way ‘one should live’: the ‘should’ is formally that of egoistic rationality, but the task is to reach the right understanding of the ego.
Both Socrates and Plato gave that account in terms of reason and knowledge. Plato saw the fullest expression of these powers in the form of systematic theoretical understanding, something which led to the consequence that the philosopher was the happiest and most fully developed of human beings; it led also to the Utopian political system of the Republic. Socrates himself certainly never developed the latter ideas (though the view, popularized by Popper, 19 that Socrates himself was politically a democrat who was betrayed by the authoritarian Plato has no historical basis). The idea, however, that the real self, which is fully expressed in the life of justice, is the self of the discursive intellect, is only a development of Socratic conceptions. It may be that Socrates laid more weight than Plato on ‘knowing how to act’, and less on knowledge expressed in systematic theory, but certainly the notion that knowledge had to be reflective and rational was already there. An ‘interest in definitions’, as well as a concern with ethical questions, is what Aristotle plausibly tells us can be ascribed to the historical Socrates, and the interest in definitions with regard to ethical matters certainly took the form of trying to reach a reflective and articulate understanding of the criteria of virtuous action, which would make good practice more rationally lucid and self-critical.
If the essence of virtuous action lay in rational knowledge exercised by the soul, then there could be no separate motives represented by the various virtues, as conventionally distinguished: justice, self-control, courage, and the rest. All of them could only be expressions, in different spheres or aspects of conduct, of the same basic rational motivation. When Socrates taught the ‘unity of the virtues’ under rational prudence or intelligence, he did not mean that there were no ways of distinguishing one virtue from another. He meant rather that they were not basically different motivations: they were the same power of the soul, under different manifestations. Since, further, rationality must be displayed in balancing one kind of demand against another, and an exaggeration of, say, ‘courageous’ behaviour would not in fact be an expression of real rational understanding of what was required of one, it followed that it would not be an expression of the one underlying power of reason, and hence not of any virtue at all. So the unity of the virtues implied, as might be expected, that one does not properly display any virtue unless one displays all of them.
Virtue is the pursuit of one’s interest, construed as a rational agent—the proper interest, as Socrates put it, of the soul, and this was probably already taken by Socrates in a way which implied that the interests of the soul were a separate matter from those of the body, an implication which Plato’s drastically dualistic theory of soul and body was to pursue further in the direction of asceticism. Virtous action is a matter of the calculation of what truly matters most to one, and what matters most to one is what matters most for one’s soul: these are the demands of the virtuous life, of courage, honour, justice. Hence if one does not act in accordance with those demands, one acts to defeat what matters most to one; no man can consciously act in such a way; so wrong action must involve a failure of knowledge and understanding, and be something which one could not possibly have chosen with open eyes. So all error is involuntary, and ‘noone willingly errs’, as Socrates put it: a conclusion still discussed under the name of ‘the Socratic paradox’.
The paradox raises in fact two different questions. The first is whether a person can voluntarily do one of two things, while fully and consciously holding that he has stronger reason to do the other. The second question is whether a person must, if clear-headed, admit that he always has stronger reason to do acts of justice, honour, and so forth, rather than acts of mean temporal self-interest. Most would now find it hard to give a simply Socratic answer to the second question, supported as that is by the ascetically dualistic view of the self. One difficulty that such a view inevitably raises, and which Plato himself treats uneasily, is the marked contrast between the spiritual view of one’s own interests which is needed by the account of morality’s motivations, and the less spiritual view of other people’s interests which is needed by its subject-matter. Socrates thought that the good man cannot be harmed, for the only thing that could touch him would be something that could touch, not his body, but the good state of his soul, and that is inviolable. But—apart from other and perhaps deeper weaknesses of that picture—we must ask why, if bodily hurt is no real harm, bodily hurt is what virtue so strongly requires one not to inflict on others?
To the first of those two questions, however, the one in terms purely of conscious action and rationality, some philosophers would still give the Socratic answer. To those of us whose actions seem often very divergently related to what we take to be our reasons, that answer will still seem a remarkable paradox. It should be offered, if at all, not as a demure tautology about action and reason, but rather as conveying an ideal (a highly problematical one) of a state in which action becomes wholly transparent to the agent. That is still, itself, very much a Socratic ideal.
It is surprising how many elements in Socratic-Platonic morality are still to be found in the complex and very interesting ethical theory of Aristotle, different though it is in certain central respects. It is different, most importantly of all, because not all the weight is put on intellectual excellence and pure rationality. Aristotle distinguishes between ‘intellectual excellences’ and ‘excellences of character’, and emphasizes the importance to the latter of the correct formation of desire and motivation through training. Without correct upbringing nothing can be done: the hopes for the regenerative powers of philosophy itself which are implicit in the Socratic stance have gone, as has the sense of any combative scepticism against which morality has to be defended. A more settled order is in question. Aristotle, moreover, did not believe in a soul wholly separate from the body, and that denial goes with a rejection of Socratic asceticism, and with more worldly possibilities for eudaimonia. The old link of arete and public approval, which Plato sought to cut altogether, cautiously reasserts itself in the Aristotelian account, though his theory of the motivation of the virtues is much more sophisticated than anything that had been achieved at an earlier time, or indeed by Plato himself.
Yet, granted these differences, Aristotle still ends by regarding the life of theoretical reason as the highest form of human life, a conclusion which does not follow as directly, or even as coherently, from his premisses as it did from Plato’s. He preserves also something like the Socratic paradox about action and reason. He even preserves, in effect, the Socratic conclusion about the unity of the virtues, since he thinks that one cannot genuinely have any one excellence of character without the presence of phronesis, ‘practical reason’ (itself one of the intellectual excellences), but if one has phronesis, then one must have all excellences of character. This emphasis on the rational integration of character, as also on the integration of a good life over time, its retrospective rational shapeliness, is indeed a central feature of Aristotle’s outlook. In the matter of the ultimate unity of virtuous traits of character, certainly this is one issue on which the Greek view seems far from ours: nothing is more commonplace to us than that particular virtues not only coexist with, but carry with them, typical faults. But this is one of the many differences with the Greeks where the contrast itself points to an illuminating area of discussion: what divergences in the understanding of human nature underlie these different conceptions of a rationally desirable life.
It is worth bringing together several features of Greek ethical thought which mark it off in many ways from current concerns and from the moral inheritance of the Christian world. It has, and needs, no God: though references to God or gods occur in these writers, they play no important role. It takes as central and primary questions of character, and of how moral considerations are grounded in human nature: it asks what life it is rational for the individual to live. It makes no use of a blank categorical moral imperative. In fact—though we have used the word ‘moral’ quite often for the sake of convenience—this system of ideas basically lacks the concept of morality altogether, in the sense of a class of reasons or demands which are vitally different from other kinds of reason or demand. The sharp line that Kantianism, in particular, draws between the ‘moral’ and the ‘non-moral’ is very partially paralleled by another sharp line, Plato’s line between soul and body; but the parallelism is far from total, the distinctions are drawn on quite different principles, and the discussion of the merits and failings of each will be a quite different sort of discussion. Relatedly, there is not a rift between a world of public ‘moral rules’ and one of private personal ideals: the questions of how one’s relations to others are to be regulated, both in the context of society at large and more privately, are not detached from questions about the kind of life it is worth living, and of what is worth having or caring for.
In all these respects the ethical thought of the Greeks was not only different from most modern thought, particularly modern thought influenced by Christianity, but was also in much better shape. There are of course respects in which its outlook could not be recaptured now, and some in which we could not want to recapture it. Some of its thoughts express a certain integration of life which perhaps existed for a short while in the city-state, but which, as Hegel emphasized, would have to be recovered, if at all, only in some totally changed form. Other features of its perceptions, its substantive attitudes to slavery, for instance, and to the role of women, we must hope will never be recovered at all.
At a more theoretical level, it is important that Greek ethical thought rested on an objective teleology of human nature, believing that there were facts about man and his place in the world which determined, in a way discoverable to reason, that he was meant to lead a cooperative and ordered life. Some version of this belief has been held by most ethical outlooks subsequently; we are perhaps more conscious now of having to do without it than anyone has been since some fifth-century Sophists first doubted it. But when all that has been said, it is true that Greek ethical thought, in many of its basic structures and, above all, in its inability to separate questions of how one should relate to others and to society from questions of what life it is worth one’s leading and of what one basically wants, represents one of the very few sets of ideas which can help now to put moral thought into honest touch with reality.
In these last remarks I have mentioned ‘Greek ethical thought’, and that principally refers, of course, to the philosophical ideas of Socrates, Plato, and Aristotle which, very sketchily, I have discussed. But there is a question which I should like to raise in closing, which reaches behind them, and behind some other aspects of Greek philosophy which have been touched on in this chapter.
I have mentioned already Socrates’ saying, that the good man cannot be harmed: it expresses an ideal of rational self-sufficiency, of freedom from the damage of contingency. There is an analogy, not merely superficial, between this type of assertion of rationality, and that cognitive demand for the elimination of luck, which appeared in the discussion of knowledge, certainty, and scepticism. The ideal of self-control, always high among Greek aspirations, turned into the aim that, in both cognition and action, what is of highest value, what matters most, should be entirely under the self’s control. In later schools, this theme reappeared in various forms: in the Cynic exaggeration of Socratism, that virtue was sufficient for eudaimonia and that the good man really could be happy on the rack; in that hope for a state of ataraxia which the Sceptics were not alone in cultivating. Aristotle expressly discussed the question of how far eudaimonia, the ultimately desirable state, could be subject to risk, and replied that to a small but ineliminable degree it had to be. This represented, however, not so much any large or perilous aspiration, as rather the entirely sensible thought that it is unreasonable to leave out of account the apparatus of social life within which men live and express themselves, and which is subject to fortune. Very notably, a dimension of life which to us is one of the most significant precisely because of its reaching outside the defended self, friendship, is discussed by Aristotle in a way which now seems bizarre in its determination to reconcile the need for friendship with the aim of self-sufficiency.
A deeper sense of exposure to fortune is expressed elsewhere in Greek literature, above all in tragedy. There the repeated references to the insecurity of happiness get their force from the fact that the characters are displayed as having responsibilities, or pride, or obsessions, or needs, on a scale which lays them open to disaster in corresponding measure, and that they encounter those disasters in full consciousness. A sense of such significances, that what is great is fragile and that what is necessary may be destructive, which is present in the literature of the fifth century and earlier, has disappeared from the ethics of the philosophers, and perhaps altogether from their minds. Nietzsche found Socrates to blame for this, with his excessive distrust of what cannot be discursively explained, his faith in the ‘fathomability’ of nature, and his ‘Alexandrian cheerfulness’.20 Those remarks belong, in fact, to the first period of Nietzsche’s long and ambivalent relations to the figure of Socrates, and it was a period in which Nietzsche thought that the ‘meta-physical solace’ of tragedy could be understood only through a fundamentally aesthetic attitude to life, an attitude which we have even greater reason to reject than Nietzsche eventually had. But however much he or we may qualify his account of Greek tragedy and Greek thought, what he pointed to is truly there: Greek philosophy, in its sustained pursuit of rational self-sufficiency, does turn its back on kinds of human experience and human necessity of which Greek literature itself offers the purest, if not the richest, expression.
If there are features of the ethical experience of the Greek world which can not only make sense to us now, but make better sense than many things we find nearer to hand, they are not all to be found in its philosophy. Granted the range, the power, the imagination and inventiveness of the Greek foundation of Western philosophy, it is yet more striking that we can take seriously, as we should, Nietzsche’s remark: ‘Among the greatest characteristics of the Hellenes is their inability to turn the best into reflection.’
FURTHER READING
This is a list of some translations of the Greek writers themselves, and a few books about them; it does not try to include any of the innumerable works about their later influence.
Details of works marked ‘(N)’ will be found in the notes. Guthrie, vols. i–iii (N) provides much useful information, but is not very searching in philosophical interpretation. All translations of the Presocratics involve vexed questions of interpretation: those offered by G. S. Kirk and J. E. Raven in The Presocratic Philosophers (Cambridge, 1957), with commentary, are no exception. Less ambitious is Ancilla to the Presocratic Philosophers by Kathleen Freeman (Oxford, 1948).
Hussey (N) is interesting and firmly argued. Allen and Furley (N), and its companion volume Furley and Allen (London, 1970), are useful collections of essays, as is Mourelatos (N). A similar collection on Socrates is edited by G. Vlastos, The Philosophy of Socrates (New York, 1971).
PLATO
A complete translation, by various hands, is offered in one volume edited by E. Hamilton and H. Cairns (New York, 1961); some of the translations come from the well-known complete translation by Benjamin Jowett (4th edn., revised by D. J. Allan and others, 4 vols., Oxford, 1953).
There are many general accounts of Plato’s philosophy, but most suffer from outdated assumptions, and some are very fanciful. An Examination of Plato’s Doctrines by I. M. Crombie (2 vols., London, 1962, 1963) offers a sober study of the arguments.
A useful series of new commentaries on important dialogues, with translation, is offered by the Clarendon Plato Series (Oxford), general editor M. J. Woods.
A collection of essays parallel to that on Socrates is edited by G. Vlastos (2 vols., New York, 1970).
ARISTOTLE
The standard translation is the Oxford Version, in 11 vols., general editor W. D. Ross; extensive selections from this are in The Basic Works of Aristotle (New York, 1941). A useful series of commentaries with translation is in the Clarendon Aristotle Series (Oxford), general editor J. L. Ackrill.
General works on Aristotle include: W. D. Ross, Aristotle (London, 1923); D. J. Allan, The Philosophy of Aristotle (Oxford, 1952); G.E. R. Lloyd, Aristotle: the Growth and Structure of his Thought (Cambridge, 1968).
Useful collections of essays include one by J.M.E. Moravcsik (New York, 1967); and Articles on Aristotle, ed. J. Barnes, M. Schofield, and R. Sorabji (2 vols. published so far, London, 1975, 1977).
OTHER
On scepticism, see Stough (N), and for a more general survey of post-Aristotelian philosophy, A. A. Long, Hellenistic Philosophy (London, 1974). The works of Sextus Empiricus are translated (facing the Greek text) by R. G. Bury in the Loeb Classical Library (4 vols., London, 1933). An important collection of articles is Doubt and Dogmatism: Studies in Hellenistic Epistemology, ed. M. Schofield, M. Burnyeat, and J. Barnes (Oxford, 1980).
The everyday moral ideas which underlie, and differ from, the ethical philosophies of Socrates, Plato, and Aristotle are valuably considered in K. J. Dover, Greek Popular Morality in the time of Plato and Aristotle (Oxford, 1974).
Finally, in the context of this chapter it is specially important to mention E. R. Dodds’ great book, The Greeks and the Irrational (Berkeley and Los Angeles, 1951).
SEVEN
The Analogy of City and Soul in Plato’s Republic
In making the first construction of the city, there is an assumption that it should be able to tell us something about in the individual: we look to the larger inscription to help us read the smaller one, 368D. But, as Plato indeed implies, the larger inscription will help with the smaller only if they present the same message. What is Plato’s reason for expecting the same message? Basically, it is that applies to both cities and men, and that it signifies one characteristic: “So the just man will not differ at all from the just city, so far as the character of justice is concerned, but will be like it” 435B). That there should be some kind of analogy between cities and men in respect of their being would seem to be a presupposition of asking the question “what is and expecting one answer to it.
Indeed at 434E Plato says that when we transfer what we have said about the city back to the man, we may find that it does not work out; but the moral will be that we should go back and try again and “perhaps by looking at the two side by side and rubbing them together, we may make justice blaze out, like fire from two sticks. . . .” Plato clearly has a fair confidence that this technique will work: his confidence is in what I shall call the analogy of meaning.
At 435E, however, he takes what is in fact a different tack. Proceeding there to the division of the soul, he seems at first sight to be backing up the “analogy of meaning.” “Are we not absolutely compelled to admit that there are in each one of us the same kinds and characteristics as there are in the city? For how else could they have got there? It would be ridiculous to imagine that among peoples who bear the reputation for being spirited . . . the spirited character in their states does not come from the individual citizens, etc.” This looks as though it means that we call a city, people, etc. “spirited” because most or all of its individual persons can be called “spirited”—and for certain terms, this style of account is very reasonable.
But for such terms (the three examples that Plato gives at 435E correspond, it is worth noting, to the three elements of his analogy), so far from having something that backs up the previous principle of finding a common characteristic in virtue of which both cities and men are called so-and-so, we have something that defeats it. For if we say that “F” is applied to the city just because it is applied to the men, we have already explained how the term can be applied to both cities and men, and to go on from there to look for a similar explanation of how “F” applies to men is at least pointless, since the phenomenon which set off the search for the analogy in the first place, viz. the fact that “F” applies to both cities and men, has already been explained. If, moreover, the rule for applying “F”to cities is taken as itself the common that we were looking for, then we have not just pointlessness but absurdity, since the common will have to be something like “x is F if and only if x has constituent parts which are F, ” which leads to a regress. Thus the argument at 435E, so far from backing up the “analogy of meaning, ” defeats it.
Plato in any case does not seem to think that every term which can be applied to both cities and men obeys the rule of 435E. Thus at 419A ff.(the beginning of Book IV), answering Adeimantus’ objection that the guardians get a thin time of it, Socrates says that a city’s being sublimely happy does not depend on all, most, the leading part, or perhaps any, of its citizens being sublimely happy, just as a statue’s being beautiful does not depend on its parts being severally beautiful. This contradicts the principle of 435E, and certainly contains a truth. Leaving the importantly, and indeed deeply, contentious case of “happy, ” we can certainly agree that a large crowd of sailors is not necessarily a crowd of large sailors, while an angry crowd of sailors, on the other hand, is a crowd of angry sailors. So what Plato has here are two classes of term: one class (“angry, ” “spirited, ” etc.) obeys the rule of 435E, which we may call the whole-part rule; while the other class (“large, ” “well-arranged, ” etc.)does not.
However, Plato does not proceed along the lines of this distinction. Rather, for an indeterminately large class of terms, possibly including , he wants to say both:
(a) A city is F if and only if its men are F;and
(b) The explanation of a city’s being F is the same as that of a man’s being F (the same of Fness applies to both).The combination of these, as we have already seen, could lead to a regress, but Plato avoids this by holding (a) only for the city-man relation, and not for the relation of the man to any further elements—that is to say, he does not take (a) as itself identifying the of Fness. Thus “F” does not occur again in the explanation of what it is for a man to be F: at that stage, it is reduced to something else. Thus the explanation of a man’s being , and the of in general, are alike given us by the formula.
(c) Each of the elements ( ) does its job, which of course implies
(d) rules.
Applying (a) to the particular case of , we get
(e) A city is if and only if its men are;while at the same time, for a city as for a man, we have the requirement that its being consists in (c)’s being true. But what does (c) mean of a city? For like cities, the elements of cities consist of men: and how are the characters of these elements to be explained? Here it seems the whole-part rule must certainly apply—it was, we remember, with reference to these characteristics that Plato introduced us to it. We shall have
(f) An element of the city is logistic, thymoeidic, or epithymetic if and only if its men are.
But the of a city, as of anything else, consists in (c)’s being true. So in order to be a city must have a logistic, a thymoeidic, and an epithymetic element in it. Since it must have an epithymetic element, it must, by (f), have epithymetic men: in fact, it is clear from Plato’s account that it must have a majority of such men, since the low-est class is the largest. So a city must have a majority of epithymetic men. But an epithymetic man—surely—is not a man; if he is not, then the city must have a majority of men who are not , which contradicts (e).
This contradiction is, I believe, powerfully at work under the surface of the Republic. Remaining still at a very formal and schematic level, we get another view of it by asking what follows if we accept (e) and also take the analogy between city and soul as seriously as Plato at some points wants us to. Since the men are , of each man (d) will be true, and ;(no doubt in some rather restricted way) will be at work in each member even of the lowest and epithymetic class. Some minimal exercise of ;would seem to be involved in bringing it about that each man sticks to his own business, which is the most important manifestation of social : though it is very notable that Plato repeatedly uses formulations abstract and impersonal enough to prevent such questions pressing to the front. (A very striking example of this is at the point where is first, after the hunt through the other cardinal virtues, pinned down. At 433C–D we have a reference to the beneficent effects of the of the guardians, but by contrast with this, “that which is in” [. . . ] even slaves, artisans, women, etc., and which makes the city good, is represented not as a characteristic of theirs, but merely as a fact, that each minds his business [, 433D4–5].Clearly, this fact cannot be “in” these people—the question is, what has to be in these people to bring about this fact.)
But now if the epithymetic class has in this way to exercise some , and this helps it to stick to its tasks, recognise the rulers and so forth, and if we read this result back through the analogy to the individual soul, we shall reach the absurd result that the in a just soul harkens to in that soul through itself having an extra little êof its own. Recoiling from this absurdity, we recognize that in the individual soul, the cannot really harken; rather, through training, the desires are weakened and kept in their place by ê, if not through the agency, at least with the cooperation, of . If with this fact in our hand we come back once more across the bridge of the analogy to the city, we shall find not a and logistically cooperative working class, but rather a totally logistic ruling class holding down with the help of a totally thymoeidic military class, a weakened and repressed epithymetic class; a less attractive picture. The use of the analogy, it begins to seem, is to help Plato to have it both ways.
Does Plato intend us to accept the proposition (e), that the citizens of the city are themselves ê The question is not altogether easy. The passage 433–4, from which I have already quoted the most no-table evasion, manages to create the impression that the answer must be “yes” without, so far as I can see, ever actually saying so. An important contributory difficulty here is the point which has been often remarked, that the earlier account of has left with not enough work to do, so that it looks like merely another way of describing the same facts. In the case of , he comes out and says that it is a virtue of all citizens (431E–432A); but the route to this conclusion has several formulations which make even this seem shaky (431B–D, particularly: “the desires in the many and vulgar are mastered by the desires and the wisdom in the few and superior”). The tension is always the same. The use of the analogy is supposed in the upshot to justify the supreme rule of a logistic element in the city, where this element is identified as a class of persons; and it justifies it by reference to the evident superiority of a soul in which the logistic element controls the wayward and chaotic desires. But this will work only if the persons being ruled bear a sufficient resemblance to wayward and chaotic desires—for instance, by being persons themselves controlled by wayward and chaotic desires. And if they are enough like that, the outcome of Plato’s arrangements will be less appealing than first appears.
Suppose, then, we give up the proposition that all or most people in the city are ê; thus we give up the whole-part rule for . We might, at the same time, put in its place something rather weaker than the whole-part rule, which we might call the pre-dominant section rule:
(g) A city is F if and only if the leading, most influential, or predominant citizens are F.
The effect of using (g) with is of course to cancel any implication that the citizenry at large are—it merely gives us something that we knew already, that the guardians are . But the importance of (g) is in no way confined to the case of—it is a rule which Plato appeals to often, and particularly in his discussions of the degenerate forms of city in Book VIII. It is in the light of the predominant section idea that we should read the reiteration of the whole-part idea which introduces those discussions at 544D. If we look at some of the things that Plato says about the degenerate cities, this will lead us back again to the just city, and to the ineliminable tension in Plato’s use of his analogy.
With the degenerate cities, it is clear in general that not all the citizens are of the same character as the city, and there are references to citizens of a different character. The tyrannical city is, not surprisingly, that in which there is most emphasis on the existence of citizens different in character from the tyrant: 577C “the whole, so to speak, and the best element is dishonourably and wretchedly enslaved”; cf. 567A, 568A “the best people hate and flee the tyrant.” In other kinds of city, there may be a minority of citizens of a character inferior to that of the city as a whole: there may be a few men of tyrannical character in cities where the majority is law-abiding (575A); if few, they have little influence, but if there are many, and many others who follow their lead, then they produce a tyrant (575C). We can notice here that even in a tyranny there is a requirement that a substantial and influential section of the citizens should share the character of the city. Again, at 564D we are told that the “drones” are already present in an oligarchy, but in a democracy they become the leading element
The democracy, however, presents a special difficulty. Plato says that the distinguishing mark of a democracy is that it is the state in which one finds men of every (, 557C), and like a garment of many colours it is decorated with every sort of character ibid.).Having said this, it would be impossible for Plato to say that all the citizens were “democratic” men as described at 561D al.—always shifting, without expertise in anything, prepared to indulge any etc. Nor should it be easy for him to say that the majority are such men. Yet this is precisely what he has to say. The “predominant section” rule says that the character of the state is derived from that of the ruling citizens. In the cases where the rulers are few, this will not necessarily imply much about the character of other citizens, for the few may hold their power by force, threats, etc. (as in the case of the tyrannical state, already considered: and cf. 551B, the origin of the oligarchy). Plato says that a democracy will also come into being by threat of force, 557A—but this is merely vis-à-vis the ruling oligarchs. A democracy is a state in which the many rule, and if it gets its character from that of its rulers, then the majority must have a “democratic” character. This, on the face of it, sorts none too well with the claim that the democratic state will particularly tend to contain all sorts of character—the “democratic” character seems in fact to be a special sort of character. Moving between the social and the individual level once more, Plato seems disposed to confound two very different things: a state in which there are various characters among the people, and a state in which most of the people have a various character, that is to say, a very shifting and unsteady character.
These people, moreover, are the same people that constitute the lowest class in the city; so we are led back once more to the question we have already encountered, of how, consistently with Plato’s analogy and his political aims, we are to picture their quiescent state when (in the form of other persons) rules. It may be said that in the difficulties we have found about this, we have merely been pressing the analogy in the wrong place. The essential analogy here might be claimed to be this:just as there is a difference between a man who is controlled by and a man who is controlled by , so there is such a difference between states, and to try to infer the condition of the epithymetic class when it is ruled from its condition when it is not ruled is like trying to infer the condition of a man’s when they are ruled from their condition when they are not. What we are concerned with (it may be said) is the healthy condition of man or city, and relative to that the difference between a good and a bad state of affairs can be adequately—and analogously—explained for each.
Such attempts to ease out the difficulties only serve to draw attention to them. For, first, certain things can be said about the when they are “ruled.” For instance, there is the notable difference between a man who has his under control, so that he does not act on them except where appropriate, but for whom they are nevertheless very active, so that control is the outcome of struggle and inner vigilance; and a man whose has achieved inner peace. That inner peace, again, might be of more than one kind: some might be mildly and harmoniously active, or there may have been some more drastically ascetic achievement—solitudinem faciunt, pacem appellant* could apply to inner peace as well. But these differences, read back into the political case, precisely revive the earlier problems. Inner peace is what Plato must want, but that in the political case requires the allegiance of the epithymetic element, and we are back to the question of how we are to picture that being secured. Again, a difference between the barely self-controlled man and the man of inner peace is that the first has some which the latter does not have—if a man has inner peace, then some he will have eliminated or never had. But does the difference between the good city and democracy then lie partly in the emergence in the latter of extra and more violent epithymetic persons? If so, then Plato has to explain why the working class even in the good city has to be thought of as though they were already potentially such persons. If not, we are faced with the original problem once more, of what it was in those potentially violent persons that kept them in their place in the good city.
Let us suppose that it is the inner peace model that Plato has in mind, and that it is achieved through the exercise of , on a modest scale, by the individuals in the working class. (They might have been said to possess some measure of , if that were not inconsistent with the eccentric theory of knowledge which the Republic presents). If their individual helps in keeping the workers in their place, then (as we saw earlier) the analogy is no longer in full working order, since that feature cannot be read back into the soul without absurdity. But let us waive that point, and ask what has to be presupposed to keep even the remnants of the analogy going for Plato’s purposes. It is not enough that in its economic function, the role of the lowest class should bear some analogy to the role of the in individual life. For if we stick merely to the nature of certain roles or functions, no argument will have been produced against the view of Plato’s democratic enemy, that those roles or functions can be combined with the business of ruling. Criticism of Plato often concentrates on his opinion that ruling is a matter of expertise; but he needs more than that opinion to reach his results in the Republic, and has to combine with it a set of views about what characteristics and talents generally co-exist at the level of individual psychology. In that area, he has to believe not only that êcomes in two sizes (as we might say, regular size and king size), but also that the talents and temperament that make good soldiers go with thymoeidic motivations, and the talents and temperament that make good workers go with epithymetic motivations.
Of these, the former looks plausible enough—indeed, soldierly temperament and thymoeidic motivation are perhaps necessarily connected (that is a question we shall come back to). Again, logistic supremacy and fitness to be a guardian are of course for Plato necessarily connected. But how about epithymetic motivation and fitness to be a Not even Plato at his loftiest can have believed that what actually qualified somebody to be a cobbler was the strength of his . The most he can have thought is that the sort of man who made a good cobbler was one who had powerful ; and this is also the least he can think, if he is to keep any of the analogy going and justify the subordinate position of cobblers by reference to their epithymetic disposition. So what we have to believe, it seems, is that cobblers are characteristically men of powerful passions—of more powerful passions, indeed, than soldiers—who nevertheless have enough rational power to recognize the superiority of philosopher kings when there are philosopher kings, but become unmanageably volatile when there are no philosopher kings.
There have been those who thought that the working classes were naturally of powerful and disorderly desires, and had to be kept in their place. There have been those who thought that they were good-hearted and loyal fellows of no great gifts who could recognize their natural superiors and, unless stirred up, keep themselves in their place. There can have been few who have thought both; Plato in the Republic comes close to being such a one, even though we can recognize that his heart, and his fears, lie with the first story. His analogy helps him to combine both stories, in particular by encouraging us to believe in an outcome appropriate to the second story from arrangements motivated by the first.
What about and the military class? Here there is a slightly different kind of tension in the structure. At no point, we must remember, does the structure present a simple contrast of the psychological and the political, for on both sides of that divide we have two sorts of thing:elements, and a whole which is affected by those elements. On the political side we have classes, and a state which is affected by which class is predominant among them (hence the “predominant section rule” we have already looked at); the theory is supposed to yield both an analysis and a typology of states. On the psychological side, we have “parts of the soul, ” and persons in which one “part” or another is dominant; this yields, first, a classification of motives within the individual, and, second, a typology of character. The difficulties we have just been considering, about the epithymetic class, are generated across the political-psychological boundary, in the relations that Plato finds between, on the one hand, the working class and a state dominated by that class, and on the other hand, epithymetic motivation and a character dominated by such motivation. In the case of the , the most interesting difficulty (it seems to me) breaks out earlier, in the relations between the type of motivation that is represented by this “part of the soul, ” and the type of character that is produced by its predominance. Once the type of character is established, the political consequences follow, granted Plato’s general outlook, fairly easily. Indeed, it is just the appropriateness of those consequences that seems to dictate the connection of ideas on the psychological side; whatever may be the case elsewhere in the Republic, here the political end of the analogy is dictating certain features of the psychological end.
I shall not attempt here any general discussion of the divisions of the soul, which, particularly with regard to the distinction between , is a large subject of great independent interest; 1 I shall make only some remarks about .When it first appears, it already has a rather ambivalent role. On the one hand, it seems to be something like anger, and we are told, in distinguishing it from , that it is manifested by children (441A) and animals (441B), and we are reminded of the Homeric figure who reproached his own anger. However, right from the beginning it takes on the colour of something more morally ambitious (as we might put it) than mere anger or rage; the case of Leontius and other examples (439E–440E) take it rather in the direction of noble indignation, and we are told (440E) that rather than class it with , we should rather say that “in the strife [, a significantly political word] of the soul it takes arms on the side of .” If merely represented anger this would indeed be a surprising psychological claim.
The claim is indeed weakened a little at 441A, when it is said that acts as to “if it has not been corrupted [¡«: it can scarcely mean “destroyed”] by bad upbringing.” But the concession is not adequate. For so long as there is any conflict at all—and if there is not, the question does not arise—it clearly is possible for anger to break out, not merely against , but on the side of against ê. What is more interesting than that psychological platitude is the fact that Plato reveals elsewhere that he is perfectly well aware of it, and indeed in a passage where he is defending exactly the same doctrine as in the Republic. In the image of the chariot and the two horses in the Phaedrus, when the black (epithymetic) horse bolts, the white (thymoeidic) horse helps the (logistic) charioteer to bring it to a halt; and when the black horse is finally stopped, it turns on its companion and “abuses it in anger , 254C). Mere anger, Plato’s dramatic realism reveals, can always side with the devil. The thymoeidic element in the soul is from its inception more than mere anger, or indeed any other such motive which there might be good reason on purely psychological grounds to distinguish from (a drive to self-destructive risk-taking, for instance).
It is to be understood, rather, by working backwards from the character which is determined by its dominance, a character which is in turn to be understood in terms of a form of life: the military or competitive form of life which it was a standard thought to contrast with the life of contemplation on the one hand and the life of gain on the other (cf. Aristotle EN I.5.1095b17, with, in particular. Rep. 581C), a contrast embodied in the Pythagorean saying about the three sorts of people that come to the Games (Iamblichus De Vit. Pythag. 58). In this contrast of types of character there is also a political or social thought, of course, and that is why, as I suggested earlier, Plato has great ease in adjusting psychology and politics in the case of : as the passage in question makes explicit (440E–441A, 440D), politics is there at its introduction.’Ehas an independent psychological foundation, and Plato makes a lot of it and of its psychological relations to in the individual, as a type of motivation. With that, I have argued, there are grave obstacles to Plato’s reading back into the city what he needs for his political conclusions, obstacles to some extent concealed by his use of the tripartite analogy.
GLOSSARY OF UNTRANSLATED GREEK WORDS
: just
: justice
: character
: appetite, appetites
ê: appetitive (epithymetic) part õ: auxiliary
: craftsman
: spirited (thymoeidic) part
: reasoning (logistic) part
: account
: correct belief
: temperance
: wisdom
* A glossary of untranslated Greek words can be found at the end of this essay. —Ed.
* Tacitus, Agricola 30: “They make a desolation and call it peace.” —Ed.
1 For a very brief suggestion on this matter, see my “Ethical Consistency, ” in Problems of the Self (Cambridge, 1973), p. 169.
NINE
Cratylus’ Theory of Names and Its Refutation
At the very beginning of Plato’s Cratylus Hermogenes explains Cratylus’ view by saying that it supposes there to be a certain natural correctness (orthots) of names; that this correctness is the same for all linguistic groups; and (very strongly) that it has nothing to do with what name anyone actually applies to anything—so that, he is quoted as saying to Hermogenes, ‘your name would not be Hermogenes, even if everyone called you that’ 383b). This last point implies something which explicitly emerges later, that, for Cratylus, the question whether some word ‘N’ is the correct name of a given item is the same as the question whether ‘N’ is that item’s name at all.
The assumption that the answers to those questions must be the same is not shared by everyone in the dialogue. It is shared by Hermogenes, for reasons which are (roughly) the opposite of Cratylus’. It is not shared by Socrates, whose final position requires us to distinguish the questions; or rather, to put it more precisely, it requires us to make a distinction which can be handily put by us in terms of a possible divergence between the name of X and the correct name of X, and is often so put in the dialogue, but which can also be expressed, as we shall see later, in terms of two kinds of correctness.
In trying to give some account of Cratylus’ theory of names, I shall particularly emphasise that distinction and Cratylus’ denial of it. Some of what I include in that theory is not advanced by Cratylus in the dialogue, but by Socrates in the course of his attempt, with Hermogenes, to elaborate a notion of ‘the correctness of names’ (see 391b for the start of their enquiry); but Cratylus fully adopts their theory (428c), and, whatever other status these conceptions may have, they are (at least in outline) consequences of the general views which are refuted in the argument against Cratylus at the end of the dialogue. Whether Plato displays any independent attachment to them is a question I shall touch on at the end.
According to Cratylus, then, if ‘N’ is not the name of a given item, it makes no difference if people call it ‘N’—or, perhaps, try to call it so: the embarrassment at this point will grow into an objection. Equally, if it is the name of that item, it makes no difference if people do not so call it. The name-relation is purely binary, relating a word and an item. Names can, of course, be of different kinds, and while the first examples are proper names of people, this is not the basic case, and the theory applies to general terms; indeed, it applies to proper names because it applies to general terms. Exactly what kind of item is named by a general term is a question on which the dialogue gives us no help, and it need not concern the present discussion.
What could such a binary relation be? The first level of discussion which contributes to answering the question gives us the principle that if ‘N’ is the name of a given item, and ‘N’ can be resolved etymologically into other names, then the combination of those names must be appropriate to the item. But this, clearly, only raises another question; we eventually have to invoke a theory of elements, and these achieve their relation to what is named through imitation (mimesis) (422 seq.), the basic idea, sketchily enough conveyed, being that the action of producing a certain vocal sound resembles some process in the domain of what is to be named. This theory, elaborated in detail through the labours of the etymological section, and presented with an immense degree of irony by Socrates to Cratylus, is agreed by him to represent his view (428c).
We originally saw that Cratylus holds
(1) If ‘N’ is the name at all of an item, it is the correct name of that item.
We have now learned
(2) If ‘N’ is the name of an item, ‘N’ bears a certain complex relation to that item.
Let us call that relation the ö-relation. The relation is to be explained in terms of the procedures for resolving names into other names, and, ultimately
(3) therelation is grounded in the idea of an element of a name being a mime–ma (430a9) of a process or natural feature.
There is a difficulty lurking in this which Plato seems to mark without pursuing. (3) requires that there should be elements of names which are related to reality through mimesis, but it does not require that they should themselves be names: indeed they are not, and an elementary name—the simplest thing which is itself a name—is, relative to these elements, itself a complex.1 While the theory permits this, there seems no reason why it should actually require it. Socrates is obviously right in saying at 422b that the correctness of those names that are elementary will have to be tested ‘by some other method’—i.e. not by etymological resolution; but it does not follow that they must be resolved into something other than names. They might be names whose correctness is to be tested by a method which does not involve resolving them at all.
It is unclear why the theory should not yield this outcome. There is indeed the point that the ultimate simples are sounds, which, except for the vowels, cannot be uttered by themselves: the nearest we can come to isolating them in speech is to add further and arbitrary elements to make them pronounceable. This point is of course made at 393e, merely in order to illustrate, early in the argument with Hermogenes, the general idea that the addition or subtraction of some elements need not destroy the effect of a name. But the status of the elements surely raises a question about the theory of the -relation. Why is it that the ultimate elements, when made with a little assistance into isolable names, turn out to be the names of those sounds (or letters), and not names of the natural features to which they are linked by mimsis? The problem for Cratylus should not just be that the word for hardness can be either or (434c), but that it is not rh() itself.
When Cratylus enters the dialogue at 428, he asserts claim (1) of his position in the strongest possible terms, resisting at the same time Socrates’ suggestion that ‘legislators’ (nomothetai), regarded as originally imposing names, might be expected to have done their work better or worse. ‘So are all names correctly applied (orths keitai)?’, Socrates asks, and Cratylus answers, ‘Inasmuch as they are names’ (429b10–11). In reply, Socrates makes explicit the distinction denied by (1), in the form of distinguishing between the view that the name ‘Hermogenes’ does not apply (keisthai) to the third person present, and the view that it does apply, but ‘not rightly’; and Cratylus says that it does not apply to him at all, but is rather the name of someone who has the appropriate nature, i.e. to whom that name bears the -relation.
Socrates’ essential step in refuting these claims is to show that they leave Cratylus with nothing coherent to say when one introduces the dimension of what speakers actually do with names, a dimension necessarily left out by any view which finds the whole account of naming in the -relation, since that relation is simply a relation between words and things. Socrates’ first example (429e) ingeniously introduces the act of addressing someone (proseipein) with the wrong name. The example is of one who, in foreign parts, greets Cratylus and says ‘Welcome, Athenian visitor, Hermogenes, son of Smikrion!’2 The question is, does he not even address Cratylus, but rather Hermogenes? Or no-one? When Cratylus replies that such a person would seem to him phthenxasthai allo–s, ‘to speak’—one could take it to mean—‘to no purpose’, his answer leaves Socrates still with the room to ask (rather oddly) whether what he spoke was true or false; but this elicits the explanation that he would be making a noise, like someone banging a pot, and this retrospectively offers the possibility of a different reading for allos: he would merely be producing speech.
This conclusion can be related quite simply to Cratylus’ position. It is important that Cratylus does not have to say (what would be simply false) that the speaker addresses Hermogenes rather than Cratylus. He can reasonably say that there is a speech-act, which may be called ‘addressing someone by name’, such that there are two separate necessary conditions of its being true that X addresses Y by name:
(i) X addresses (speaks to, directs words to, etc.) Y;
(ii) In the course of (i), X uses a name which is a name of Y.
It will follow that in the situation which Socrates puts to Cratylus, the speaker does not address anyone by name: not Cratylus, because of condition (ii), and not Hermogenes, because of condition (i). If the purpose of his speaking was to address someone by name, then indeed he spoke all–s—even if Cratylus’ final gloss on that failure is a little exaggerated.
However, that does not get Cratylus very far, and once the speech-act aspect of the question is raised at all, Socrates is in a position to show that even to understand Cratylus’ theory requires one to understand possibilities which Cratylus denies. He shows this, first, with regard to mistakes, and, ultimately, with regard to convention.
Cratylus denied that, in the imagined situation, the speaker addressed anyone by name, since he did not satisfy both the conditions of doing that with respect to any one person. But he cannot deny that the speaker satisfied condition (i) with respect to the man in front of him: he certainly, for instance, spoke to him. Moreover, he used a particular name in relation to him; and Cratylus must know all that, or he could not diagnose the situation as he does. So Cratylus must accept that the speaker performed some speech-act in relation to the man in front of him, and indeed he must know what it is for X to call Y ‘N’. But if so, then he must know what it is for X to call Y ‘N’ although ‘N’ is not Y’s name, and he is in a position to recognise mistake. Moreover, he must know what it is for almost everyone usually to call Y ‘N’, and he is in a position to recognise convention.
The argument about mistake is developed in terms of the allocation (dianome) of names. One can identify Y and a particular name independently of one another, and one can bring that name to Y’s attention (431a1–2, cf. 430e6–7, very forceful expressions of perceptual confrontation), just as one can bring to his attention a certain picture; and one can claim that what is displayed is his name or picture. Whatever relation constitutes a particular name’s being his name—if, for instance, as Cratylus believes, it is much the same relation as constitutes a picture’s being his picture—that claim may be false. Even when it is, there has certainly been an allocation; hence there are mistaken allocations of names.
It is important to see what a dianomis. It is an activity which can be performed on either names or pictures in relation to their objects, and, according to Socrates’ introduction of it (430d), has the properties that, in the case of a picture, if the picture is allocated to a person of which it is the picture, then the dianom is correct (orth), while in the case of a name, if it is allocated to the person of which it is the name, then the dianomis both correct and true. This suggests that the dianome does not simply involve the claim ‘this is your picture (name)’, for in any sense in which that is true or false, as well as right or wrong, with names, it is equally so with pictures. We should rather expect that dianomis an activity which, when done with a name, yields a logos, something that can be true, and when done with a picture, does not. We can imagine word-less dianom of a picture—handing it to the subject, for instance; and we can imagine a partly worded one, in the form of someone’s saying, for instance, ‘You are . . . ’ and presenting a picture. The analogy to this in the case of names would be saying ‘You are . . . ’ and presenting a name. But ‘presenting a name’ is itself a linguistic activity (cf. 387c6 ‘naming is part of speaking’), and saying ‘You are . . . ’, followed by presenting ‘N’, comes to saying ‘You are N’, which, unlike its picture analogue, can be true as well as correct.4 Of course, there is also a kind of statement that is available in both cases; that statement which Socrates gives, and which in the name case takes the form ‘this is your name’.
Nothing here, any more than elsewhere, restricts the discussion to proper names. Indeed, in the picture case it seems that the pictures can be taken as ascribing the general properties of male and female (431a3–4). The model therefore has some potential to destroy those general arguments against the possibility of falsehood, naturally associated with Cratylus’ position, which put in an appearance at 429d; and that is recognised, in a rather sketchy way, at 431b. Those arguments rest, in one way or another, on the idea that an expression ‘E’ cannot mis-fit reality, since it must be allocated either to nothing, or to whatever it is that it fits. But this critic must have some conception of what counts as ‘fitting’, as I have called it, and of what it is that a given ‘E’ would fit. But then he has an understanding of some (at least) statements of the form ‘ “E” fits that’, an understanding which allows also for the possibility of such a statement’s being false; and that possibility is the same as that of ‘E’ misfitting reality.
This has the same structure as the dianomargument in the Cratylus. Of course, the potential for destroying the argument against falsehood cannot be fully realised until a general way is found of locating independently the item which ‘E’ fits or misfits, and this is not achieved until the Sophist, if then. The point that the Cratylus does not achieve this has been made by John McDowell, 5 who points out that ‘the function of indicating what is being talked about is not credited to a constituent in the account’ but has to be discharged by an act of confrontation. (A similar limitation, it may be said, can be found in the account given by the Theaetetus, insofar as that is even partly successful, of false identity statements.) The Cratylus, however, disclaims any attempt to give a general answer (429d7–8), and what it does say perhaps has a greater potential for being generalised than the criticism allows. McDowell also objects that the Cratylus’ contribution is not merely limited but misguided, on the ground that it tries to assimilate falsehood to partial accuracy, as though an expression could be discovered to misfit reality only if its general shape were right but other features wrong. But this is to connect the discussion of dianometoo closely to what follows. That discussion lasts to 431c3, and indeed relates, though not in very general terms, to the puzzles of falsehood; from 431c4, Socrates takes off on a further discussion (au, c4), designed to deal with the -relation itself.
This discussion reverts to issues of name-giving, and the activities of a nomothets. Plato might be thought to invite confusion by moving so easily between name-giving and the use of established words, since the possibilities of mistake are evidently so different in the two. But—as Plato clearly sees—they are different only if certain assumptions are made, assumptions which are denied by Cratylus. According to Cratylus, there is no act which a nomothetes or anyone else can perform to make ‘N’ the name of Y—‘N’ either bears the required -relation to Y or it does not. Hence what is called ‘name-giving’ will be merely a trivial variant on describing. The distinction between name-giving and using an established name will collapse also at the other end of the spectrum, with that radical Humpty-Dumpty view which Hermogenes offers early on (384d1–2, 385a) as one version of what he opposes to Cratylus. As Cratylus assimilates name-giving to describing, so this assimilates describing to name-giving. The view, opposed to both of these, that what is Y’s name depends on ‘agreement and custom’, 6 precisely leaves room for the distinction, since there is an important difference between following a practice and trying to initiate one.
In his attack on the -relation itself, Socrates first shows that there is a conflict between Cratylus’ faith in mimesis (his thesis (3)) and the all-or-nothing view that he takes of the name-relation, since mimsis depends on resemblance, and resemblance is a matter of degree. The very notion of one thing’s being an eikn, a representation, of another, involves this point; for the only absolute notion of resemblance that could be used is that of indistinguishability, but an item indistinguishable from Cratylus would not be a representation of Cratylus, but ‘another Cratylus’. The very idea of a representation of X, such as Cratylus takes a name to be, already implies at least a selection among the properties of X. The fol-lowing argument, including the examples at 434–5, works from this point to show that we can recognise that ‘N’ is the name of Y independently of the exactness of its representation, and this, like the argument about dianom, undermines thesis (1). But it goes further, for the same considerations show that one can recognise ‘N’ as the name of Y independently of resemblance altogether. (3) is wrong, and, as Hermogenes said (414c2), getting resemblance to do this job is a sticky business, 7 and we have to fall back on agreement. It is merely custom and agreement that makes a given name the name of a given item, and this excludes not merely this particular candidate for the -relation but any kind of relation as constituting the name-relation itself.
The conclusion may be put in terms of the conditions for something’s being a name; and that could leave it open whether there was some further question about the correctness of the names which, as things are, we use. Alternatively, the conclusion may itself be expressed in terms of correctness, as it is at 435c. In those terms, the conclusion will be that agreement and custom govern everyday correctness—they will be the determinants of whether someone has correctly used a name which we have in our language. In that case, the further question that might possibly arise would be about the correctness of our language. We may then distinguish two ways in which questions about correctness may be raised. There are certainly questions of internal correctness, to be settled by reference to our linguistic practices. There may or may not be a question of external correctness, a question about the correctness of our linguistic practices.
Socrates agrees with Hermogenes that custom and agreement are the sole determinants of internal correctness. Hermogenes, however, thinks that there is no further question of external correctness, while Socrates thinks that there is: there are requirements on what a language has to be, which follow from what it has to do. This is the point of the tool analogies at 387 seq. But this, as Kretzmann8 has made very clear, has nothing to do with any idea of the material properties of words resembling the world, as was claimed in the theory of the -relation. The resources of the language can be better or worse adapted to the requirements of dialectic, and that will make it better or worse in an external sense, but it will be so only in virtue of its structural properties and the semantic relations of its terms to each other, and not in virtue of their shape or sound or any such feature.
Socrates, then, differs from both Hermogenes and Cratylus in thinking that there are two questions, of internal and external correctness; or, in the alternative formulation, that there is one question about what the name for a given item is, and another about whether the practices that undoubtedly assign it that name are correct. Hermogenes thinks that there is only one question, settled by the appeal to our practices. Cratylus thinks that there is one question, to be settled by the basically external device of the -relation; but Socrates’ own answer to the external question will be on totally different lines from that.
Socrates’ conclusions are not formally inconsistent with claiming that names do as a matter of fact possess some mimetic features; nor do they strictly exclude the aim of remodelling the language so that names acquire such features. Many have thought that Plato does show some real attachment to the mimetic principle. But, so far as the actual language is concerned, the treatment of the etymological enterprise as a whole, and particularly the mimetic aspect, is loaded with irony and warnings (cf.426b1, the reference to the expert; 428d, Socrates’ doubts; and many other passages); while it is a notable fact that Socrates is prepared to re-run the entire diagnosis of the language on lines opposite to the Heraclitean principles which he and Hermogenes have used. He indeed says at 435c2–3 ‘it pleases me that names should be as far as possible like things’, a formulation neutral between explanation of the actual language and aspiration for a better one; but it is permissible to take this as referring to what Socrates indeed claimed long before, that the structure of language should represent the structure of things.
Certainly that is all we should expect Plato to find important. Here one must bear in mind not just the conclusions already discussed, but the powerfully demystifying arguments towards the end of the dialogue about what might be learned from language. Cratylan mimsis is not what makes our names function as names, and, if they display such features at all, the question arises of how they came to do so. They will, at best, be a flickering record of observations made by the nomothets (as one might say, by human experience). As a recipe for linguistic improvement, again, the mimetic principle has nothing to offer. The functions of language, and the purposes for which it might be improved, are to teach, learn, inform, divide up reality. The knowledge required for that can appear in language only if someone possesses it already; and while there might be point in making that knowledge appear structurally, and thus improving language dialectically, there can be no such point to altering it in the direction of Cratylan mimsis.
Even if it is not formally inconsistent with them, an attachment to Cratylan mimsis is in fact banished by the conclusions of the Cratylus. This brilliant, tough-minded and still underestimated dialogue does not only show that the idea of language’s having mimetic powers could not explain what language is; it leaves the belief in such powers looking like what it is, a belief in magic.
END-NOTE
The phrase at 435c4–5, , has received various translations. LSJ incautiously offers ‘clinging’ for and ‘attractive force’ for . Jowett4 treats both this, and Hermogenes’ use of at 414c2, which is explicitly mentioned here, in terms of ‘hunger’, and Rep. 488a2, is usually taken on the same lines: ‘how greedy I am of similes’. Others have taken to mean ‘shabby’, but this sense (e.g. d.23.208) clearly comes from the notion of tight-fistedness or being sticky with one’s money, which does not fit; in any case, it hardly goes well with the comment that the appeal to agreement is something . Neither line pays enough attention to 414c, where the adverb has to be attached to verbs which express the addition or subtraction of letters by the etymological interpreter, while Socrates’ reply cites, in the usual ironical tone, conditions that supposedly make these elaborate manoeuvres necessary. This would fit an interpretation of 435 which gives the as, straightforwardly, ‘a sticky haul’, like getting a ship to move over a gummy slip-way: one has to work hard to try to keep the resemblance theory moving.*
1 The point is discussed by Norman Kretzmann: ‘Plato on the Correctness of Names’, American Philosophical Quarterly, 8 (1971), 126–38.
2 Hermogenes’ father’s name was Hipponikos: 384a8, 406b8. It has been conjectured that Cratylus really was son of Smikrion: cf. Diels–Kranz, Die Fragmente der Vor-sakratiker (6th edition), 11 65.1 and note.
3 This sense of , for instance in Sophocles Ph. 947, ‘a mere image’, is admittedly well attested only where occurs with a substantive (see Jebb, ad loc.). But the reading suggested, besides tying up with Cratylus’ later remark, has the advantage that it gives him a reply which relates to, and undercuts, all the alternatives that Socrates presents in his question. of course a standard term not only for human sounds, but for animal cries (cf. Arist. HA 535a30) and for noises from inanimate things—for instance, a pot when struck, Tht. 179d. (I am grateful to the editors for comments on this matter.)
4 Cf. the formulation at 429c6 of the question to which the discussion of dianom helps to give an answer: ‘Is someone not mistaken who says that he is Hermogenes?
’
5 Plato Theaetetus (Oxford 1973), 236.
6 , the standard phrase in the dialogue: cf. õ, 384d8. As Robinson pointed out, it is only in that passage and in conjunction with that phrase that in this dialogue expresses the contrast to: see ‘The Theory of Names in Plato’s Cratylus’, in Essays in Greek Philosophy (Oxford 1969), 112.
7 435c4–5: see the end-note for this translation.
8 Op. cit., especially 135.
* Anyone who knows Gwil Owen and is interested in ancient philosophy will have learned from him. I myself, though only a part-time student of these subjects, have had the good fortune of being able to learn from him for more than thirty years.
However, I hope, as other contributors must hope, that this book will be read by many people who will never have known Gwil at all. That reflection often tempts contemporaries to reminisce, in the hope of preserving the essence of their friend and teacher for the future. With regard to Gwil as teacher, that temptation need not be indulged. His writings, in their compression, intense power of argument, and brilliantly resourceful learning, convey better than any selection of anecdote what his influence has been.
TWELVE
Aristotle on the Good: A Formal Sketch
This paper attempts a simple formal treatment of Aristotle’s discussion of the good in Nicomachean Ethics I 1–7 (1094 a 1–1098 a 20). Its aim is to distinguish some of the leading concepts used by Aristotle, and to examine some of the logical relations between them; with the particular purpose of establishing what premisses, granted the formal apparatus, are sufficient or necessary for some of the main conclusions supposedly established by Aristotle in this passage.
We shall use first-order predicate calculus with identity and with the modal operator “N” = “it is necessary that”. Variables “x”, “y”, etc., will range over the arts, enquiries, actions, etc. (1094 a 1 seq) which can in the broadest sense be pursued, and which Aristotle regards as the subject matter of his enquiry into the good. We shall use one primitive predicate letter “P”, which will however have two rôles, as standing for a one-place and for a two-place predicate. “Px” is to be interpreted “x is pursued”; “Pxy” is to be interpreted “x is pursued for the sake of y”. In these interpretations, the terms “pursued” and “pursued for the sake of” are intended to cover a number of expressions used by Aristotle, but which, at least in the discussion under consideration, he seems to use interchangeably, such as “aims at”, “is desired for the sake of”, etc. Some further remarks about the interpretation of “P” will follow the next paragraph.
1094 a 1 seq gives us, a little tentatively, a statement which is presupposed throughout the discussion: that everything that is pursued is pursued for the sake of something; we may trivially add that everything pursued for the sake of something is pursued:
We may add further that if x is pursued for the sake of y, y is itself pursued:
The discussion of the architectonic relations in cc. 1, 2 init. make it clear that the relation “Pxy” must be transitive and, for different values of x and y, asymmetrical:
The restriction of asymmetry to non-identical values of x and y in (4) is necessary because, as will be seen, “Pxy” is not irreflexive.
(3) and (4) clearly raise certain questions about the interpretation of “P”. If, as the previous sketch of an interpretation might well suggest, it is a sufficient condition of the truth of “Pa” that a is at some time pursued by somebody, (3) and (4) will almost certainly under interpretation come out false, since it is clearly possible that Pab by somebody at some time, and Pbc by somebody else at some time, without Pac by anyone at any time. Again, it seems that it might well be the case that Pab by someone at some time, and Pba by someone else at any time, or by the same person at a different time. These difficulties, however, lie not so much in the formalization of Aristotle’s discussion by means of the predicate “P”, as in Aristotle’s discussion itself; exactly these questions are bound to arise in any consideration of his very general method of argument. The most effective ways to avoid these difficulties are perhaps: (1) to restrict interpretation of the variables to actions as characterized by certain preferred descriptions—for instance by selecting characterizations of a and b in “Pab” such that it will be obvious how someone can pursue a for the sake of b, which will in general rule out “Pba” for the same characterizations of a and b; (2) to take as interpretation the dispositional pursuit-structure of one fully rational and consistent agent with a settled pattern of desires. “Fully rational” here must include an evaluational element, which is certainly inherent in Aristotle’s treatment; his discussion, for instance, of things which can be pursued for their own sake is confined to things which a sane and rational man would pursue for their own sake. (This accords with his remarks on the requirements for intelligent study of his theory, 1095 b 3 seq.) It will be safe to say that Aristotle supposes all his propositions to hold for the pursuits of a thoroughly consistent phronimos;* some for wider classes of agents; some, being, or supposedly being, logical truths (such as (1) and (2)), for any conceivable agent. The same must hold for the interpretation of “P”.
Granted that something is pursued, (1) and (2) can generate an infinite series of P-statements:
Pa;
Pab, for some b (by (1));
Pb (by (2));
Pbc, for some c (by (1)); etc.
1094 a 20 (whatever else it states) states that such a series cannot be continued indefinitely, for the good reason that the notion of “pursuit for the sake of” would then lack content (“our desire would be empty and vain”). Nor can we stop its infinite prolongation by making it circular, i.e. by introducing some earlier term into the second argument place of some later statement. For suppose such a series
(i) Pab
(ii) Pbc . . .
(n) Pna.
Repeated applications of (3) will give from (ii) . . . (n) : Pba; but this, by (4), is inconsistent with (i). Hence we may infer, as Aristotle infers,
From this, of course, we cannot infer that there is only one x such that Pxx, i.e.:
nor can we infer
for there is nothing in what has gone before to show that we may not have independent chains Pab Pbc . . . Pkk, Pmn Pno . . . Puu, with no common members.
It may be tempting to think that the two statements *(6) and *(7) are equivalent. This is not so, and since *(7), but not *(6), will be of interest in the later argument, it is worthwhile to distinguish them. The following argument will illustrate the issue:
Suppose (i) Paa.
Suppose further that for some d
(ii) (x) [Px Pxd]
Then (iii) Pa (i, by 1)
(iv) Pad (ii, iii)
Thus, it may be thought, from (i) and (iv)
But since the argument applies equally well to any a such that Paa, we shall have derived *(6) from *(7).
The foregoing argument, however, is invalid, since it requires an extra premiss, that if something is pursued for its own sake, it cannot be pursued for the sake of something else as well:
*(8) is rejected by Aristotle, 1097 a 34. If *(8) were accepted, *(6) and *(7) would indeed be equivalent, since (a) the foregoing argument, with the extra premiss, would be valid, so that *(6) could be derived from *(7); (b) *(7) can be derived from *(6) even without the extra premiss, as follows:
(i) Suppose *(6), and (x) Px;
then (ii) there is just one thing, say d, such that Pdd;
but (iii) everything that is pursued is pursued either for its own sake, or for the sake of something pursued for its own sake (by the argument of (5));
(iv) in either case, it is pursued for the sake of d (by (ii));
so (v) there is something for which everything is pursued.
Thus *(6) implies *(7).
Even the addition of *(8), however, would not make either *(6) or *(7) derivable from any of (1)–(5).
The notion contained in *(7), viz. that of something for the sake of which everything is pursued, is important for Aristotle: it is his notion of “the good, or the supreme good” (1094 a 22). We may therefore define:
and the consequent of *(7) may be written
(10) (x) SGx.
Aristotle is not yet in a position to prove (10). It might be suggested that 1094 a 1 seq. shows Aristotle to have derived (10) invalidly from (1); but this is an implausible, as well as uncharitable, interpretation of his intention, since he clearly regards (1) as certain and presupposes it throughout, but (10) is later introduced as uncertain (1097 a 22 seq.). Nor, I think, does the difficult passage 1094 a 18 seq. (the first sentence of c. 2) have to be taken as an attempt to infer (10) from (5) and the considerations that lead up to it. The passage runs:
If, then, there is some end of the things we do, which we desire for its own sake (everything else being desired for the sake of this), and if we do not choose everything for the sake of something else (for at that rate the process would go on to infinity, so that our desire would be empty and vain), clearly this must be the good and the chief good. [tr.Ross]
Here we have two antecedents for the same consequent, each containing a parenthesis. Let the antecedents with their parentheses be signified by ‘A(a)’, and ‘B(b)’. Clearly (b) is offered as a reason for B, and (a) as a specification of the ‘end’ mentioned in A. If now B(b) were offered as a reason for A(a), we should have the invalid inference referred to. However, it is possible to take B, not as a reason for A(a), but as a consequence of it, brought in by Aristotle as suggested by the larger hypothesis A(a), and suggesting in its turn a reason for itself (b); in this case the invalid inference will not be committed. The passage is in any case confusedly expressed, and it is perhaps impossible to say exactly what it means. If so, the former interpretation is certainly not obligatory. Even if it is accepted, however, it is clear that Aristotle lays no great weight on the invalid argument.
We shall return to (10). Meanwhile, it is to be noted that Aristotle believes that there are at least four things pursued for their own sake (pleasure, honour, reason, virtue 1097 b 2, cf. 1096 b 17):
Of any such thing, it is evident that there does not have to be anything else for the sake of which it is pursued, although (*(8) being rejected) there could be. Of any such thing, Aristotle says that it is final (teleion):
1097 a 34 seq. In the same passage, Aristotle goes on to introduce the notions, at first sight surprising, of “more final” (teleioteron) and “most final” (teleiotaton). He gives in fact two applications of the former, the first to things not pursued for their own sake, the second to things that are pursued for their own sake; of these the former seems of little use, and involves the awkward consequence that something can be more final without being final. Omitting this application, his accounts of the two notions may be represented, respectively:
We may infer
consequents)but the restriction to y’s that are TL in the consequent of (ii) can be dropped, the consequent holding for non-TL y’s as well: for, for any non-TL y such that Pxy, there would have to be (by the argument of (5) and by (12)), some TLz such that Pyz; whence by (3), there would be a TL z such that Pxz, contrary to (ii).
We may further infer
i.e. that there is at most one TLT thing. For
suppose (i) TLTa & TLTb & a b;
then (ii) TLRab & TLRba, (by (14));
which is absurd.
We cannot infer, however, that there is at least one TLT thing:
(It is worth noting, in passing, that we could not derive this by adopting the premiss, nowhere offered by Aristotle,
Since the TLR-relation is asymmetrical, as seen in the proof of (16), *(18) would allow us to derive (17) if the TLR-relation were also transitive, but it is not.)
More importantly for Aristotle’s argument, we could not derive (17) from (10), if we independently accepted that. From (9) and (10) we should have
From (ii), by the acceptable principle abesse ad posse valet consequentia, we could infer
(17), however, by (13) and (14), requires
and it is clear that the second conjunct of the consequent of (iv) cannot be provided from (i)–(iii). Moreover, (iv), and hence (17), does not imply (10), since a posse ad esse non valet consequentia. Thus we have the interesting negative result that the existence of an SG thing and of a TLT thing do not imply one another. Nor is this surprising, if one considers the interpretation of “N” in (12)–(14). It is clear that Aristotle regards the necessity and possibility involved in the notions there defined as intensionally connected with the specifications of the things that are final, most final, etc. Thus happiness (eudaimonia), which is said in fact to be most final, is so because it makes no sense, according to Aristotle, to ask of happiness, so specified, for what it is being pursued. This being so, we can see that merely from the fact that a certain thing was that for which everything was done, it would not follow that it had the further intensional property of being TLT; or conversely.
What we can show, however, is that if there is a SG thing, and there is a TLT thing, they must be one and the same:
For suppose (i) SGa
(ii) TLTb
Then, from (i), (ii) (which implies Pb), and (10),
(iv) Pba;
but from (ii), (iii), and (15),
(v) N ~ (Pba).
Aristotle does in fact assert both (10) and (17). What are his reasons? For the latter, two reasons can perhaps be found. The first consists in the mere observation that happiness does possess the intensional characteristic in question, and is in fact pursued. The second is a more a priori reason. It seems to be Aristotle’s belief that a reason or justification can be given or found for a given pursuit only in terms of some end served by the pursuit.1 This end may, of course, lie in the pursuit itself, as has been seen (5). This can be the case with any TL thing. But Aristotle remarks that there is more than one TL thing (11). If we were merely left with the set of TL things as each providing reasons, there could be ultimately reasonless choices between pursuits, since no reason could be given for choosing what conduced to one TL thing rather than what conduced to another. If this is to be avoided, there must be some TL thing that stands in a special relation to the others, as something for which they can be pursued, but not it for them, and this will be the TLT thing.
From neither of these reasons does (10) follow, because it does not follow from the fact that there is one special TL thing for which the others can be pursued that they always are or should be pursued for it. It may be that Aristotle overlooked the lack of implication between (17) and (10), and falsely supposed that an argument for the first was an argument for the second. There is, however, no necessity to think this. For Aristotle gives at least one quite independent argument for (10), viz. the argument from function, 1097 b 25 seq. Moreover, even omitting this as coming rather late in the discussion to be more than a confirming argument, (10) might be supported merely a posteriori (thus 1094 a 1 seq., granted it is not an invalid derivation of (10) from (1), may be the tentative acceptance of an endoxon or received opinion in favour of (10)). If this is so, we may suppose Aristotle to have had independent reasons for believing in an SG thing, and in a TLT thing, and then (validly) have inferred their identity.
We may end by considering one further characterisation that Aristotle applies to the good, viz. that it should be autarkes, or self-sufficient. There are two senses of this term, which, though connected, are distinct, and are sufficiently distinguished by Aristotle at 1097 b 14. In the first sense, the good is autarkes if its possession is to the greatest extent secure, and not subject to the whims of others and similar contingencies not in the possessor’s power. This is the sense that Aristotle also, and better, expresses by saying that the good should be “proper to a man and not easily taken from him” (oikeion ti kai dusaphaireton, 1095 b 25). In the second sense, the autarkes is “that which when isolated makes life desirable and lacking in nothing . . . the most desirable, not counted as one good thing among others” (1097 b 14 seq.). This account at least involves the thought that what is autarkes is a TL thing, and that no other TL thing can be pursued independently of it; for TL things are things pursued for their own sake by reasonable men, i.e. are worth pursuing, and besides the autarkes there is nothing worth pursuing. Thus we can say, as a possible definition:
But by transitivity (3) we can conclude that anything pursued for the sake of any of the things pursued for their own sake is also pursued for the sake of the AUT. Moreover, the AUT is pursued for its own sake; since nothing else is left, we have
The implication, moreover, obviously holds in the opposite direction a fortiori; so, by (9)
In this case, by previous arguments, being AUT will be neither a necessary nor a sufficient condition of being TLT.
However, an alternative definition might be suggested in which “AUT”was expressed in terms of necessity. Thus it might be suggested that anything that satisfied Aristotle’s description of AUT would be something other than which there could not conceivably be anything higher, i.e.
This, however, would not by itself be adequate, since it leaves open the possibility, excluded by the first definition and by Aristotle, that there should be some TL thing independent of, though not superior to, the AUT. Thus what is needed is rather a combination of (20) and *(23). If we allow the principle of inference
this can be economically effected by merely adding “N” to (20):
From this, using (n), we can infer as before (21); but we cannot derive the converse implication to give (22). We can infer the universal closure of *(23) by a simple argument:
Suppose that AUTa and that, contrary to *(23), for some x, say b, such that b ‚ a, Pab. Then, by the argument of (5), there is some y, say c, such that Pcc, and Pac, either directly if c = b, or by transitivity. Then by (24), since Pcc, Pca. But this, by (4), is impossible, since we have Pac.
Moreover, we can clearly derive
from (21), (which we have seen to be derivable from (24)), by the principle ab esse ad posse. Putting together (25) and the universal closure of
*(23), obtained by the last result, we can reach
though the converse implication will not of course hold. Thus if the attractive definition (24) is accepted, we shall have the result that something’s being AUT will imply both its being SG and its being TLT; while, as we have seen before, its being SG neither implies nor is implied by its being TLT; the most that can be established in respect of the two latter concepts alone being that if there is an SG thing and there is a TLT thing, they are one and the same.
* Person of practical wisdom—Ed.
1 Cf. e.g. the account of deliberation, 1112b12 seq. and its rôle in phronesis [practical wisdom—Ed.] 1140a24 seq.
THIRTEEN
Justice as a Virtue
I shall consider some points in Aristotle’s treatment of justice in Book 5 of the Nicomachean Ethics, in order to raise certain questions about justice as a virtue of character. I am concerned with what Aristotle calls “particular” justice, that is to say, with justice considered as one virtue of character among others. This disposition is said to have two basic fields of application, the distributive and the rectificatory; this distinction will not concern us, and almost all the discussion can be referred to the first of this pair. Particular justice and injustice are concerned with a certain class of goods—“those which are the subjects of good and bad luck, and which considered in themselves are always good, but not always good for a particular person” (1129b3–5). These are listed at 1130b3 as honor, money, and safety: these are “divisible” goods, which are such that if one person gets more, another characteristically gets less.
From the beginning, Aristotle associates particular injustice with pleonexia—variously, greed, the desire to have more, the desire to have more than others: pleonekte–s ho adikos 1129b1. This characteristic Aristotle treats as the defining motive of particular injustice:
If one man commits adultery for the sake of gain, and makes money by it, while another does so from appetite, but loses money and is penalized for it, the latter would be thought self-indulgent rather than pleonekte–s, while the former is unjust and not self-indulgent: this is obviously because of the fact that he gains. Again, all other unjust acts are ascribed in each case to some kind of vice, e.g. adultery to self-indulgence; deserting a fellow soldier, to cowardice; assaulting someone, to anger. But if he makes a gain, it is ascribed to no other vice but injustice. [1130a24 f.]
This passage occurs in chapter 2 where Aristotle is concerned to find the distinguishing mark of particular injustice. It seems clear that the reference to “unjust” acts is to acts that are unjust in the general sense—that is to say, roughly, wrong—and a similar interpretation is given to adikei at 1130a17.1 Aristotle’s point is that the way to pick out acts that are unjust in the particular sense from the whole range of acts that are contrary to justice in the general sense is by reference to the motive of pleonexia (which, on any showing, is excessively restricted, at this point of the discussion, to the desire for monetary gain). This is what the passage means; but its exact conclusion is unclear, and discussions of it do not pay enough attention to the Aristotelian distinction between unjust acts and an unjust character. It is one question whether particular injustice as a vice is characterized by the motive of pleonexia; it is another question whether all acts that are unjust in the particular sense are motivated in that way. The two questions come together only if some quite complex assumptions are made, which I shall try to bring out.
Later in the book, Aristotle directly addresses the distinction between acts and character, and also applies his usual distinctions about responsibility. In chapter 8, he first considers acts done from ignorance, and makes various distinctions among these: of a person acting in this way involuntarily, he says that they act neither justly nor unjustly except kata sumbeb—kos—they do things that merely happen to be just or unjust (1135a17–18). Beyond this, if someone acts, not out of ignorance, but also not from deliberation (ek prohaireseos) and, rather, from some passion, the act will indeed be an unjust act, but the agent will not be an unjust person: adikei men oun, adikos d’ ouk estin (1134a21, the first paragraph of chapter 6, a passage evidently displaced from its context). One who acts unjustly ek prohaireseo–s is a person who possesses in the full sense the vice of injustice, and is fully an unjust person.
This, so far, is standard Aristotelian doctrine about bad acts and their relation to character and intention. Leaving aside acts that are involuntary through ignorance (more simply, unintentional), we can concentrate on the distinction, among intentional acts, between those that are the product of passion and later regretted, and those that are the expression of a settled disposition or vice of character.
This distinction bears a close relation, of course, to that between the akrats and the mochthros, but it is not exactly the same. Akrasia is itself a disposition, a trait of character, and as with any other bad characteristic, one can draw the distinction between someone who has this characteristic and is regularly disposed to give in to certain kinds of impulse, and someone who on some few occasions does so. We need not be concerned here to fit the disposition of akrasia into the account.
For the present purpose we need only a distinction between acts. With respect to some undesirable characteristic V, it is the distinction, among acts that are, in the relevant aspect, intentional, between:
(A) those that are V acts but are not the acts of a V person and
(B) those that are both V and the acts of a V person.
The usual situation with the vices of character, in Aristotle’s treatment, is that it will be a necessary condition of an act’s being V that it is the product of some particular motive—lust, fear, or whatever.
To be put alongside this is another distinction among acts, in terms of their motives: the distinction between those that are motivated by a desire for gain, and those that are motivated otherwise. Now the distinction between (A) and (B) standardly consists in this, that (A) acts are the episodic and later regretted expressions of a motive that regularly motivates the person who does (B) acts, that is to say, the person who is V. But it is obvious that an (A) unjust act need not be motivated by desire for gain at all. To take Aristotle’s paradigmatic distribution case, a person could on a particular occasion be overcome by hopes of sexual conquest, or malice against one recipient, and so knowingly make an unjust distribution, and his act would surely be an unjust act.
Another of Aristotle’s claims, admittedly an obscure one, indeed leads to this conclusion. In his rather unhappy and perfunctory account of the application of the mean to justice, he says:
. . . just action is intermediate between acting unjustly and being un-justly treated; for the one is to have too much and the other to have too little. Justice is a kind of mean, but not in the same way as the other virtues, but because it relates to an intermediate amount, while injustice relates to the extremes. [1133b3 f.]
It is not worth pursuing all the difficulties raised by these remarks, but one thing that the passage seems awkwardly to acknowledge is that if X has been unjustly treated, then someone else (chap. 11), Y, has acted un-justly toward him. But it cannot be a necessary condition of X’s being unjustly treated by Y that Y be motivated by the desire for gain, rather than by lust, malice, anger, or whatever.
However, Aristotle is certainly tempted by his standard model, according to which, since pleonexia is the motive of the unjust person, (A) acts of injustice must be episodic expressions of pleonexia. This idea issues in a desperate device at 1137a1 f.:
If (the distributor) judged unjustly with knowledge, he himself gets an unfair share of gratitude or revenge. As much, then, as if he had shared in the plunder, one who judges unjustly for these reasons gets too much. . . .
There must be something wrong in extending pleonexia to cover someone’s getting more of this kind of thing. What would it be in such a case to get the right amount of gratitude or revenge?
Aristotle correctly holds:
(a) one who knowingly produces an unjust distribution acts unjustly.
He also explicitly claims:
(b) the characteristic motive of the vice of injustice is the desire for gain.
In addition, he seems disposed to accept the standard model from which it will follow that:
(c) the difference between (A) acts and (B) acts of injustice is not of motive, but only a difference in the dispositional grounding of that motive,
and the consequence of accepting all these claims is obviously false. There are acts that are unjust, and in the “particular” sense, but which are the products of fear, jealousy, desire for revenge, and so on. Moreover, they may be not just episodic expressions of motives of that kind, but rather of some related dispositional trait. The cowardly man who runs away in battle acts not only in a cowardly way, but also unfairly, and does so because of his cowardice. Unjust acts that are not expressions of the vice of injustice can thus stem from other vices. But the motives characteristic of those other vices are not the motive of pleonexia supposedly characteristic of the vice of injustice. So we cannot, granted these truths, accept both (b) and (c).
It might be said that the cowardly man’s act of injustice is in fact motivated by pleonexia, the desire for gain, as well as by fear: he is aiming at an unfair share of the divisible good of safety. That description, unlike the nonsense about an unfair share of gratitude or revenge, could contain some truth. But it will not do in order to straighten out Aristotle’s account of the matter, since 1130a17 f. makes it clear that pleonexia is seen as contrasted with such motives as fear, and not as coexisting with, or being a product of, such motives. The broader question of what pleonexia exactly is I shall come back to at the end.
(c) is one of the assumptions that I referred to earlier as needed to bring together the two questions, whether the unjust character is characterized by the motive of pleonexia, and whether all unjust acts are the product of that motive. (c) states that each unjust act must have the same motive as the unjust acts that are the product of an unjust character; and that is surely wrong. We can recognize that it is wrong, however, only because we can identify certain intentional acts as unjust in the particular sense, and can do this without referring to their motive. Indeed, we are helped by Aristotle in doing this, by his drawing our attention to such basic cases as the intentional misdistribution of divisible goods. Aristotle himself gives us a clear indication of the areas in which some unjust acts are to be found; in doing so, he also puts us in a strong position to deny, as he does not seem clearly to have done, the assumption (c).
However, the fact that some unjust acts can be located without referring to their motive does not entail that they all can be. It might be that some other unjust acts could be identified simply from their motive; in particular, by their flowing from a settled dispositional motive characteristic of the unjust character. In this case, they would not all have to be of the same types as those unjust acts that are identified independently of motive, such as misdistributions of divisible goods. They might, for instance, be acts of a sexual kind which, if motivated in a more usual way, would not be identified as having anything to do with particular injustice at all. Aristotle clearly thinks that there are acts of this kind. He associates the vice of adikia so closely with a certain motive (or rather, I shall suggest later, a certain class of motives), pleonexia, that he calls a person who is dispositionally motivated by that an adikos, and holds, in chapter 2, that any act which that person does from that motive is an act of particular injustice. Aristotle could of course go further, and hold that any act, of any kind, which is even episodically motivated by pleonexia is an unjust act in the particular sense. He would then have completed the equation of adikia and pleonexia, not only with respect to character, but with respect to acts. It is not clear to me, however, that he does hold that: chapter 2, at any rate, seems to commit him only to the view that any act of a dispositionally pleonektic man which is an expression of his pleonexia is an unjust act.
Aristotle, then, certainly equates the character-state of adikia with that of pleonexia. He certainly thinks that any act, whatever its other characteristics, which flows from that state is an unjust act. He may think, though it is not absolutely clear that he does, that any act that is even episodically motivated by pleonexia is an unjust act. He is strongly disposed to think, lastly, that any act that is an unjust act is motivated, even if only episodically, by pleonexia; but since he himself suggests some plausible ways of identifying some unjust acts independently of their motive, this is an unsound conclusion for him to hold, and insofar as he tends to hold it, it is probably because of the unsound theoretical assumption (c).
Treated in this way, adikia comes out as something rather different from anything that we would now be disposed to call “injustice.” One must certainly recognise that the dikaiosune-adikia scheme does not exactly match even a part of our justice-injustice scheme. The point, how-ever, can also be put more critically. Since Aristotle leads us so clearly, as has already been said, to some areas in which dikaiosun undoubtedly overlaps with justice, his dealings with the question of motive can be seen as an imperfection in his attempt to relate those areas to the virtues of character. Even in his own terms, the assumption (c), if indeed he made it, would be a mistake. His willingness, further, to equate the character state of adikia with that of pleonexia and to call an unjust act any act that arises from that state, can be seen as the other side of the same coin. In both ways his theory inclines him to think that the state of character that stands opposed to dikaiosune– must have a characteristic motive; and dikaiosune– is enough like justice to make it convenient, and perhaps even fair, to call this a mistake.
I now turn to some questions about justice and injustice as states of character, independently, to some degree, of Aristotle’s treatment. I shall concentrate on the area where our concepts most clearly overlap with Aristotle’s, that of distributive justice. As a way of dealing with justice as a virtue, this concentration is obviously very selective, but the general shape of the conclusions will, I believe, apply more widely. In discussing distributive justice, I will not always assume, as Aristotle does, that we are concerned with some unallocated good that is, so to speak, “up for grabs” and waiting to be distributed by some method or other to some class of recipients. We can, besides that, recognize also the case in which the good is already in somebody’s hands, and the question is rather whether he justly holds it. We can extend the term distribution to cover such possibilities, 2 though since I am mainly concerned with justice as a virtue of character and am discussing the case of distributive justice in the interest of that concern, the case where there is no distributor will be of secondary interest.
In the distributive case, we can distinguish three items to which the terms just and unjust can be applied: a distributor (if there is one), a method, and an outcome. The question basically raised by Aristotle’s treatment concerns the relation between the first of these and the other two; but it is worth saying something about the priority between method and outcome in determining what is just. Is a just outcome to be understood as one reached by a just method, or is a just method, more fundamentally, one that leads to just outcomes? At a first glance there seem to be examples that tell either way. Aristotle’s own preferred examples tend to be ones in which the relevant merit or desert of the recipients is understood (at least by the distributor) beforehand, so that the basic idea is of a just outcome, namely, that in which each recipient benefits in proportion to his desert, and a just method will be, derivatively, a method that brings about that outcome. It seems different, however, if one takes a case in which some indivisible good has to be allocated among persons who have equal claims to it, and they agree to draw lots (a method that can be adapted also to cases in which they have unequal claims to it).Here the justice is not worn in its own right by the outcome of, say, Robinson, getting it, nor is it the fact that it has that outcome that makes the method just; it is rather the other way round.
This distinction is more fragile than it first looks, and it is sensitive to the ways in which the outcome and the method are described. Thus if the method is itself described as that of allocating, say, the food to the hungry, the “desert” can come to characterize the method itself, and not merely the outcome. Not all the difficulties here are very interesting; they flow from an evident indeterminacy in the notions of method and outcome. But, even allowing for the difficulties, there is a class of cases in which the justice very specially rests in the method rather than in the particular outcome. In these, when we ask “what makes it fair that A has it (or has that amount of it)?” the answer refers to a process by which A came to have the good in question, and, moreover, no characteristic of A which does not relate to that process is appropriately cited as grounding his claim to the good. This is true of Nozick’s “entitlement theory, ”3 under which someone justly holds an item if he received it by an appropriate process (e.g., buying it) from someone who justly held it. Under such a theory, the process by which someone receives something is constitutive of the justice of his holding, and there is no independent assessment of the justice of the outcome at all.
This bears a resemblance, illuminating and also politically relevant, to another kind of case that also satisfies the condition for primacy of method, the case of allocation by lot. If Robinson draws the long straw, then what makes it fair that he gets the good is simply the fact that it was he who drew the straw. We may of course want to go further than that, and add that the straw-drawing was itself a method that, for instance, was agreed upon in advance. The fact that we can do this does not mean that the justice of the method ceases to be primary over the justice of the particular outcome: in explaining the fairness of Robinson’s getting the good, we still essentially refer to the method. However, the point that we can, in the case of lots and similar processes, relevantly go on to say such things as that the method was agreed upon in advance, serves to bring out an important contrast with entitlement theory. In the case of lots, it is possible to ask questions about what makes the method a just or fair method.
The answers to those questions may even refer, in a general way, to outcomes. They will not refer to the particular outcome, and relative to that, the method remains primary, but some general relation of the method to outcomes may be relevant. For instance, a familiar argument in favor of a particular method of allocating some indivisible good would be that the probability it assigned to any given person of receiving the good was the same ratio as the share which that person, under the same general criteria, would appropriately receive of a divisible good (he gets one fifth of the cake, and a one-in-five chance of getting the chess set). A similar point emerges from the fact that lot-drawing can be modified, in certain circumstances, to allow for repeated trials; for instance, earlier winners may be excluded from later draws because it is thought fairer to increase over time the chances of a given person’s winning. In such ways it is possible to criticize the fairness of methods such as drawing lots, by reference to general patterns of outcome, and by applying a notion of justice to such general patterns. But this resource seems mysteriously not available with Nozick’s entitlement theory, and no other considerations, it seems, can be brought to bear on the question whether established methods of transfer are fair methods. But if we are to be convinced that the favored transactions are not only just but unquestionably just, some special argument needs to be produced: it certainly does not simply follow from the truth that, relative to the particular case, the concept of “justice” applies primarily to the method and derivatively to the outcome. That is a feature which Nozick’s preferred methods of transfer share with other methods of distribution, where criticism of the methods is nevertheless possible.
For our present purposes, however, the priorities of method and outcome are a secondary issue. The main question concerns the relations of either of these to the notion of a just person, and from now on I shall speak of a “just distribution” to cover both those cases in which the method would naturally be considered primary, and those in which it is more natural to pick on the outcome. The notion of a fair distribution is prior to that of a fair or just person. Such a person is one who is disposed to promote just distributions, look for them, stand by them, and so on, because that is what they are. He may also be good at inventing just distributions, by thinking of a good method or proposing an acceptable distribution in a particular case: this will be a characteristic of Aristotle’s epieiks (1137b34), the person who is good at particular discriminations of fairness. But even there, it is important that, although it took him, or someone like him, to think of it, the distribution can then be recognized as fair independently of that person’s character. It cannot rest on his previous record that some particular distribution, which perhaps seems entirely whimsical, is just (except in the sense, uninteresting to the present question, that his past record may encourage us to believe that there are other considerations involved in the present case, known to him though invisible to us).
The disposition of justice will lead the just person to resist unjust distributions—and to resist them however they are motivated. This applies, very centrally, to himself. There are many enemies of fair conduct, both episodic and dispositional, and the person of just character is good at resisting them. This means that he will need, as Aristotle himself insists, other virtues as well: courage, for instance, or so–phrosune–. But the disposition of justice can itself provide a motive. The disposition to pursue justice and to resist injustice has its own special motivating thoughts:it is both necessary and sufficient to being a just person that one dispositionally promotes some courses as being just and resists others as being unjust.
What then is the disposition of injustice? What is it to be a dispositionally unjust or unfair person? The answer surely can only be that it is to lack the disposition of justice—at the limit, not to be affected or moved by considerations of fairness to all. It involves a tendency to act from some motives on which the just person will not act, and indeed to have some motives which the just person will not have at all. Important among the motives to injustice (though they seem rarely to be mentioned) are such things as laziness or frivolity. Someone can make an unfair decision because it is too much trouble, or too boring, to think about what would be fair. Differently, he may find the outcome funny or diverting. At the end of that line is someone who finds the outcome amusing or otherwise attractive just because it is unfair.
It is important that this last condition is not the central or most basic condition of being an unjust person. The thoughts that motivate the un-just do not characteristically use, in this upside-down way, the concepts of justice and injustice. Those concepts, however, as has just been said, do characteristically figure in the thought of the just person. It is not untypical of the virtues that the virtuous person should be partly characterized by the way in which he thinks about situations, and by the concepts he uses. What is unusual about justice is that the just person is characterized by applying to outcomes and methods, in an analogous sense, the concept under which he falls; this is itself connected with the priority of the justice of distributions over justice of character.
On this account, there is no one motive characteristic of the unjust person, just as there is no one enemy of just distributions. In particular, the unjust person is not necessarily greedy or anxious to get more for himself, and insofar as Aristotle connects injustice essentially with pleonexia, he is mistaken. The mistake can, moreover, be fairly easily diagnosed at the systematic level: the vice of adikia has been overassimilated to the other vices of character, so that Aristotle seeks a characteristic motive to go with it, whereas it must be basic to this vice, unlike others, that it does not import a special motive, but rather the lack of one.
The point is not merely that “injustice” is not the name of a motive. Beyond that, there is no particular motive which the unjust person, because of his injustice, necessarily displays. In particular, he does not necessarily display pleonexia, which, whatever else needs to be said about it, certainly involves the idea of wanting something for oneself. Not all the motives that operate against justice, and gain expression in the unjust person, fit this pattern—not even all the important ones do so.
Beyond this, however, what is pleonexia? Is it even a motive itself? To call someone pleonekts surely does ascribe certain motives to him, but motives that are very indeterminately specified. The pleonekts wants more, but there must be something in particular of which in a given case he wants more. But “more” than what? More than is fair or just, certainly, but he does not characteristically want it in those terms—he has no special passion for affronting justice, and, like the unjust person generally, he is not specially interested in using the concepts of justice and injustice at all. It is rather that he wants more than he has got, or that he wants more than others. Now anyone who wants anything that admits of more or less wants more than he has got, or at least more than he thinks that he has got; but when this becomes a recursive condition, it is called greediness, and that is certainly one sense of pleonexia. Such a person does not necessarily, or even typically, worry about comparisons with others. But in another, and probably the most important, sense of pleonexia, comparisons with others are the point, and the notion of having more than others is included in the motivating thought. The application to such goods as money or honor or the Nobel Prize is obvious.
The case of Aristotle’s third divisible good, safety, is more difficult. To want more safety than others is surely an odd want, if that is its most basic intentional description; what one wants is as much safety as possible—enough, one hopes, to keep one safe. Of course, since safety is in the circumstances a divisible good, the steps taken to satisfy this want will involve, and may be aimed at, taking away other people’s safety (pushing them out of the fallout shelter). Thus the actions involved are much the same as with cases of pleonexia, but there is still a significant difference. With the Achillean pleonekts of honor, an essential part of his satisfaction is that others do not have what he has; but the Thersitean pleonekts of safety does not mind how many are eventually saved, so long as he is, and for this reason, his pleonexia is a different thing. The important point is that pleonexia is not, in his case, ultimately a motive at all: he is a coward, with a keen understanding that safety is a divisible good, and no sense of justice. Thus even in some cases of the egoistic desire for a divisible good, pleonexia is not the most basic or illuminating way of characterizing what is wrong with the man who does not care about justice. The love of competitive honor, however, is essentially pleonektic, and straightforwardly directed at making sure that others do not get it instead of oneself.
The word pleonexia can cover both greed and competitiveness. It certainly refers to a class of motives, rather than to any single motive. Those who are pleonektic of some things are not usually pleonektic of everything: as Aristotle well knew, those who are pleonektic of honor are not necessarily pleonektic of money, and conversely; and if there is anyone who is pleonektic of safety, it is certainly not Achilles. These various motives have no doubt at all times fueled some of the most settled indifferences to justice; but it is a mistake, one that dogs Aristotle’s account, to look for something other than that settled indifference itself to constitute the vice of injustice, and, having looked for it, to find it in such motives.
1 So commentators, e.g. Joachim and Gauthier Jolif, ad loc.; W.F.R. Hardie, Aristotle’s Ethical Theory (Oxford, 1968), p. 187.
2 Robert Nozick, who strongly emphasizes this point in his Anarchy, State and Utopia (New York, 1974), calls the chapter in which this is discussed “Distributive Justice.”
3 Nozick, Anarchy, chap. 7.
EIGHTEEN
Hume on Religion
Hume died on 25 August 1776, and his burial took place four days later. In the words of his biographer, E. C. Mossner: ‘A large crowd had gathered in St. David Street to watch the coffin being carried out. One of the crowd was overheard to remark, “Ah, he was an Atheist.” To which a companion returned: “No matter, he was an honest man.” ’
Both statements, with the slightest of qualifications, seem to have been true. The qualification is to the first statement; if ‘atheist’, is taken to imply, as it often is today, ‘dogmatic atheist’, one who is prepared to assert with certainty that no sort of God or religious principle exists, this Hume was not. However, he fell not very far short of it, and was certainly an atheist by, say, Christian standards: about the non-existence of the Christian God, it seems clear that he felt no doubts. But there was some dimension of religious belief, in some pretty tenuous sense, about which he seems to have remained in a sceptical or agnostic position; and one problem in interpreting Hume on religion is to determine exactly how much or how little he was prepared to regard even as a matter of doubt.
The problem arises in part from the manner in which Hume approaches the subject—in the blend of irony and caution with which he writes about it. The caution was motivated by the religious temper of the times. Even in the liberal-minded Edinburgh of the 1750s and after, there were still certain conventions about the way in which religion, and in particular, of course, Christianity, could properly be discussed, and it was incumbent on those expressing doubts to cover their attacks with some semblance of conformity. Indeed, Hume was persuaded by his friends that his Dialogues concerning Natural Religion—which is his greatest work on religion—could not be prudently published in his lifetime at all; and it is interesting to find him in the last few weeks of his life anxiously making dispositions to ensure that it would in fact be published after his death. In this climate, the irony that was natural to Hume’s temper was of good service in assisting the demands of caution. He employs, as Kemp Smith has pointed out in his invaluable edition of the Dialogues, much the same methods of covering his tracks as did the French sceptic Bayle, from whom Hume learnt a lot. One such method was to claim that one was criticising not Christianity, but superstitious perversions of it; another was to claim that in destroying pretensions to rational argument in support of religious doctrines, one was only making way for Faith, on which they should properly rest. Kant, of course, who was much influenced by Hume’s destructive arguments, was later to claim that this was what he was doing—‘removing Reason to make room for Faith’. The difference is that he meant it, and Hume and Bayle did not.
The irony, however, does not operate only in the direction of caution. For just as in the Treatise, Hume cannot resist expressing himself in a manner designed to upset his conventional readers. It is these two, opposite, uses of irony, I think, one in the direction of prudence and one against it, that have enabled many interpreters in the past to suppose that Hume had more positive religious belief than in fact he did. For it all depends on which side of the irony you take the more seriously.
The central case of these doubts is his Dialogues concerning Natural Religion. This dialogue has three speakers: Demea, an orthodox Christian believer of traditional views, who is prepared to advance an a priori argument for the existence of God; Cleanthes, a more moderate believer, who rests his case on the Argument from Design; and Philo, a sceptic who seeks to subvert the force of both the arguments, and in particular devotes his efforts to refuting the Argument from Design, with which most of the work is concerned. The conversation between these persons is narrated, moreover, by a speaker who says that he agrees with Cleanthes, the moderate believer. This structure has in the past led defenders of Hume’s orthodoxy to suppose that Hume himself rejected Philo’s sceptical arguments: in much the same way, perhaps, as in the Treatise, philosophical doubts about the existence of the material world are rejected as strained and unnatural, as trying to run against the unavoidable force of natural belief. On this interpretation, it is in the person of Philo that Hume speaks ironically, to shock, and in the persons of Cleanthes and the narrator, the moderate orthodox, that he speaks directly.
But this interpretation, it would now generally be agreed, is wrong: the irony is the other way round. Kemp Smith has shown that it is the sceptical views of Philo that most closely express Hume’s own. Indeed, we know from his life that he rejected Christian doctrines. He was brought up in a Calvinist household—not the most narrow and repressive of such households as could be found in Scotland in those times, but rigorous enough. In his late ’teens he worked his way out of these beliefs, and—he explicitly states in a letter—never returned to them, nor to any form of Christianity. When he was dying, indeed, he calmly reaffirmed his disbelief in orthodoxy and the after-life to Boswell, who egregiously took the occasion to exhort him to reconsider his views. In private correspondence, he uses the word ‘Christian’ as a mild term of abuse: he said of Rousseau, when he had too late discovered what Rousseau was like, ‘he has a hankering after the Bible, and is indeed little better than a Christian in a way of his own’; and in 1765 he described the English as ‘relapsing fast into the deepest stupidity, Christianity and ignorance’.Particularly in the earlier years of his adult life, he was strongly anti-clerical, even though later he became friends with various Moderate divines in Edinburgh.
Apart from these biographical evidences, it can be seen from Hume’s theories that he could not have held that sceptical doubts about God’s existence were in the same position as sceptical doubts about, for instance, the existence of the external world. It is of the essence of Hume’s position that those latter doubts run against nature: that one cannot doubt the existence of material bodies, except perhaps for very brief periods in a very unnatural state of mind. But he does not regard the belief in religion as in this sense natural or inevitable at all. He does indeed think that it has natural roots, in the sense that a naturalistic account can be given of why people believe in religion, and this he attempted to give in the work called The Natural History of Religion. But this is a different matter; and it is notable that he did not believe, as did many apologists of his own and later times, that religious belief was a universal phenomenon among mankind.
While it is certain that Hume did not regard religious belief as natural, in his special sense of that term—that is, as something which human nature, by its very constitution, must embrace—there are certain obscurities in his account of it. Here it is best, perhaps, to look first at the theory of The Natural History of Religion. His basic thesis in this work is that polytheism is an earlier belief than monotheism, the latter arising only by a later process. The source of the original polytheism he locates in men’s incomprehension and fear of various circumstances that affect them: because of the unknown and hidden causes of such things as droughts, tempests, sickness and so forth, men are primitively led to posit a collection of independent personal agencies to account for these things. In advancing this view that polytheism was primary, Hume is implicitly criticising thinkers of a Deist temper, as well as some of the orthodox, who supposed that primitive man had already an apprehension of the universe as designed and created by a single designer. On the contrary, this he supposes to be a belief that arises afterwards; roughly, he thinks that one god gets advanced over the others because of emulation in praising and admiring him; and that when he is established as the God, men find reasons, such as the Argument from Design, to prove his existence.
Not only does Hume think that polytheism is primary over monotheism; he also believes—or claims to believe—that it is superior. He has two reasons in particular for this. First, polytheism is more tolerant: the Greeks and Romans, for instance, were always prepared to assimilate other people’s gods. Monotheism, on the other hand, by its very nature tends to intolerance and absolutism. From this greater tolerance of polytheism, Hume is disposed to infer, in general, its greater benevolence; but since he himself mentions the polytheistic Mexicans for the barbarism of their practices, this seems hardly a valid inference. The second reason for the superiority of polytheism is that it does less violence to reason. This is not because it is more reasonable; on the contrary, it is a complete muddle of inconsistent myths and absurd superstitions. The point is that just because it is so, it does not admit of any serious attempt to rationalise it. The trouble with monotheism is that it encourages men to rationalise religion, to try to make a philosophical and theological system out of it, and so long as the religion preserves its dogmas, this can only lead to doing violence to reason itself; one is led into an endless path of pseudo-reasoning, which is worse, because more corrupting and dishonest, than the primitive confusions of polytheism.
Hume is not, of course, recommending polytheism; he thinks that no reasonable and civilised man would dream of accepting it. Here we meet a distinction important to Hume’s account of religion; a fairly commonplace eighteenth-century distinction between the vulgar and the sophisticated. The vulgar perhaps need a religion: if so, polytheism may well be better, as doing less harm. The sophisticated may well do without one: the trouble is that the religion they may be tempted to embrace may be even worse than the primitive one. Here also, and in some ways parallel, is a distinction that Hume makes between superstition and fanaticism. By the first he means an assemblage of mythical beliefs, such as those of polytheism, which may do little harm; by the latter, the proselytising zealotry of religions such as Christianity, which he thinks is straight forwardly pernicious.
Hume has been criticised for his onesided selection of the phenomena of religion. He emphasises over and over again the power of religion to lead men into persecution, unreason, and hatred; he says little, it has been pointed out, on the power of religion to induce love, charity or steadfastness. This is indeed true. But here we have to remember Hume’s moral theory, by which men have a natural tendency to sympathy and benevolence. If then, religious men act benevolently, they do not so act because of religion—they so act because they are men. It is persecution and hatred that need the explanation, and religion only too often provides it. Now this is obviously a very limited and inadequate account of the effects of religious belief—just as, we may add, the story about men’s fears of the unknown is an inadequate account of its origins. In both cases, the limitations lie in the general body of Hume’s philosophy: in the one case, in his moral psychology, in the other, in a limited empiricist theory about the origins of belief. Hume, like Bertrand Russell in our own time, is too amiable and optimistic a man really to understand religion.
I have mentioned Hume’s distinction between the attitudes of the vulgar and of the sophisticated to religion; and I have pointed out that in his view one form of sophisticated religion was worse than the vulgar superstitious sort. Is there then no way in which sophisticated monotheism is superior to other religious beliefs? It would seem from the previous account that there was not. Yet it does seem that there is one sense in which sophisticated monotheism may be nearer in Hume’s view to something which it would be perverse or unwise to deny: he indeed says that the excesses of fanatical monotheism illustrate the maxim, corruptio optimi pessima, the worst of things is the corruption of the best. What, then, is the best? What is this something that may be left over when the bad accretions of religion are stripped away?
To find this, we must look at the Dialogues concerning Natural Religion; and particularly, granted the previous claim that the speeches of Philo represent Hume, at those speeches. Now Sir Leslie Stephen said that the Dialogues was the first sustained philosophical criticism of the Argument from Design. I do not know for certain whether this is true; what is certain is that, in a slightly different sense, it is the last—after it there did not need to be another. Although the Argument from Design lingered on through the nineteenth century, and even to the present time, Hume undermined it in a through-going and definitive manner. The essence of the Argument, as used in Natural Theology—that is, as an argument actually to prove the existence of the Christian God—is that it is a type of empirical argument, an argument from effect to cause. Hume’s objections add up to saying that as such an argument, it does not work. For first, in positing a cause for an observed effect, one is not justified in positing more in the cause than is strictly necessary to produce the effect, and this the Argument does, by positing an infinite, omniscient, etc. being as the cause of what may well be, for all we know, a finite world. Again, the argument assumes that the only cause of organisation, such as we see in the world about us, can be intelligence. But this is quite gratuitous; in our experience we see organisation proceeding from many principles other than intelligence, as for instance, animals from animals and plants from plants; why should we not as well assume the creator of the world to have been some animal or vegetable, rather than a mind? Indeed, the supposition of mind as the first cause is particularly gratuitous, since on every hand we see mind proceeding from matter, but not matter from mind. More generally, there is a fundamental fault in the argument .It is an argument from analogy; but arguments from analogy depend upon repeated occurrences of the instances to which they apply. But in this special case, this condition cannot be satisfied: we only have one world to argue about. Hence any analogy employed must be extremely weak, if it has any strength at all. All this is consistent with Hume’s views on empirical inference, and they are certainly appropriate, for it was in a special application of empirical inference that the argument was supposed to have its strength.
There is a further point. The Argument from Design was supposed to show not merely the existence of a designer, but his benevolence. Here Hume thought that the evidence was not merely too weak to bear the conclusion, but, in some respects, downright opposed to it. While granting the beauty and fitness of final causes in nature, which move our thoughts towards a designer, Philo adds: ‘But there is no view of human life or of the condition of mankind, from which without the greatest violence, we can infer the moral attributes, or learn that infinite benevolence, conjoined with infinite power and infinite wisdom, which we must discover by the eyes of faith alone’. And when Cleanthes replies that no doubt what seems inconvenient and terrible in human life seems so only because of our ignorance of some Divine plan, Philo replies with one of Hume’s most important observations in this connexion: that while such considerations might serve to reconcile the state of man’s life with Divine benevolence, if the latter were independently proved, they certainly cannot assist us to prove this benevolence from the state of man’s life.
Apart from this further application of the criticism of the analogical argument, Hume has in any case an a priori reason for disbelieving in God’s moral attributes. On his moral theory, moral attributes are derived from human nature, and only make sense in relation to it—our ideas of moral goodness are necessarily ideas of human goodness, and could not conceivably be applied to a non-human, infinite being. Indeed, in a letter to Francis Hutcheson, with whose moral theory his own had much in common, he criticises him for inconsistency in supposing that moral attributes could be applied to the Deity.
After all this, little seems to be left of the Argument from Design, or indeed of the Christian conception of God. Hume indeed thinks that the very idea of praying to God, or in the ordinary sense, worshipping him, must be inappropriate, for not only does it involve regarding God as like a man, but as like a not very admirable type of man: ‘To know god’, he makes Philo say, ‘is to worship him. All other worship is indeed absurd, superstitious and even impious.’ But now, what God? Well, Hume throughout the Dialogues is certainly impressed by the existence of the regulated final causes of nature; and he does sum up Philo’s position by allowing him to assent to the ‘somewhat ambiguous, at least undefined proposition, that the cause or causes of order in the universe probably bear some remote analogy to human intelligence’. This is the most that he thinks a reasonable man can assent to; and what is certain is that anything which might be called religion based on this proposition should have no prayer, no worship, no institutions, and no effect on moral conduct. The vague shadow of a possible religious belief is so remote that it could have no effect.
Hume was a sceptic, not a materialist. This was one reason why he objected, as he did, to the dogmatic tone of the French philosophes. For him, the ultimate causes of things remained necessarily mysterious; we know enough, he thought, to know that most things said about God must be false and inappropriate, and we can see further that attempts to argue to his existence must be useless. But we do not know what the ultimate origin of anything is, and cannot—we do not know enough to—exclude the possibility that something rather like an intelligence might—just conceivably—have something to do with it. One suspects that he had another reason for his objections to the philosophes, which was that they got too excited about the non-existence of God. He smelt the odour of a negative fanaticism, and any fanaticism, for Hume, was as bad as any other. Consistently with his philosophy, it would be the human effects of unbelief, as of belief, that would concern him most.
SIDGWICK
NINETEEN
The Point of View of the Universe: Sidgwick and the Ambitions of Ethics
Sidgwick’s book The Methods of Ethics was first published in 1874, and he took it, with substantial alterations, through five editions, and partly through a sixth. It has been recently described as ‘a systematic treatise on moral philosophy, examining in detail a far wider range of topics than any previous book on the subject, and setting new standards of precision in wording, clarity in exposition, and care in argument’.1 It is not merely an historical monument. After a period of fairly resolute neglect, it is now beginning once again to be admired and, it may even be, to some extent read. It bears a very real intellectual relation to modern Utilitarianism and to certain of its problems. There are difficulties not only about Utilitarianism, but about the very project of a systematic ethical theory, which emerge with special clarity from the pages of Sidgwick’s book, particularly because Sidgwick was in various ways both more and less conscious of them than modern writers have been. It is the relevance of Sidgwick’s book to a large and still very pressing question, the possibility of ethical theory, that I shall discuss.
Of course Sidgwick was not only famous for this book, or for his other work in philosophy. Born in 1838, he had an interest from his undergraduate days in enquiries into supernatural phenomena, and he played an important part in the early history of the Society for Psychical Research founded to pursue on a supposedly scientific basis what Sidgwick sometimes called his ‘ghostological’ interests. He felt in a way which was perhaps peculiar to his time, and indeed rather specially peculiar to Cambridge, that séances in darkened and stuffy sitting-rooms, with heavily unconscious ladies who might be hoped at least to hear voices from the departed and, with exceptional good luck, to extrude some ectoplasmic embodiment of them—that these undertakings could have some relevance to the truth of the Gospels (cf. Schneewind, p. 31). This might seem to many people now an error of judgement, as indeed it seemed at the time to Christians of other persuasions, but certainly Sidgwick’s part in the revealing history of that strange subject was substantial.
Another substantial and certainly more securely beneficent claim to fame was the very large part that he played in the foundation of Newnham College. In addition to his own large expenditure of effort, time and money on this project, his wife, Eleanor Mildred Balfour, the sister of the Prime Minister, was the College’s second Principal. In his ethical theory, as we shall see, there is a rather notable tension between on the one hand Utilitarian principles which could lead to radical change, and on the other hand an application of those principles serving in good part to justify the status quo. That tension emerges particularly in passages of considerable unease about sex and the character and motives of women in contrast to men. It is notable too that in The Methods of Ethics, the issue of women’s rights gets no mention at all, though it was of course famously a salient feature of the political and social thought of his Utilitarian forebear, John Stuart Mill. But in practice Sidgwick was energetic to admirable ends in this respect. We must be grateful that he had no disposition to share, nor even to regard as Utilitarianly valuable, a kind of conventional outlook which was expressed—I am afraid one has to admit, rather splendidly expressed—in a letter from W. B. Yeats to Katherine Tynan in 1889:
[If women go through] ‘the great mill called examinations’, they come out with no repose, no peacefulness, their minds no longer full of secluded paths and umbrage-circled nooks, but loud as chaffering market places. Mrs Todhunter is a great trouble mostly. She has been through the mill and has got the noisiest mind I know. She is always denying something.
There was quite a strong tendency, at least in liberal circles, to regard Sidgwick as rather saintly. This was a response in particular to his intellectual honesty, to be found both in the marked scrupulousness of the argument of The Methods of Ethics, and also in his resignation of his Fellowship because he could not subscribe sincerely to the Thirty-Nine Articles. That impression of saintliness, however, had about it an un removable Victorian quality which laid it open to question by those of the next generation. Maynard Keynes wrote to his friend Swithinbank about Sidgwick’s Memoir in 1906, six years after Sidgwick’s death:
Have you read Sidgwick’s Life? It seems to be the subject of conversation now. Very interesting and depressing and, the first part particularly, very important as an historical document dealing with the mind of the period. Really—but you must read it yourself. He never did anything but wonder whether Christianity was true and prove that it wasn’t and hope that it was. He even learnt Arabic in order to read Genesis in the original, not trusting the authorised translators, which does seem a little sceptical. And he went to Germany to see what Ewald had to say and fell in love with a professor’s daughter, and wrote to his dearest friends about the American Civil War.
I wonder what he would have thought of us; and I wonder what we think of him. And then his conscience—incredible. There is no doubt about his moral goodness. And yet it is all so dreadfully depressing—no intimacy, no clear-cut crisp boldness. Oh, I suppose he was intimate but he didn’t seem to have anything to be intimate about except his religious doubts. And he really ought to have got over that a little sooner; because he knew that the thing wasn’t true perfectly well from the beginning. The last part is all about ghosts and Mr. Balfour. I have never found so dull a book so absorbing.
Yet Keynes and his friends, of course, had another saint of their own, and one equally involved in moral philosophy. Keynes had written to Lytton Strachey just a month before:
I am studying Ethics for my Civil Service.
It is impossible to exaggerate the wonder and originality of Moore; people are already beginning to talk as if he were only a kind of logic-chopping eclectic. Oh why can’t they see!
How amazing to think that we and only we know the rudiments of a true theory of ethic; for nothing can be more certain than that the broad outline is true. What is the world doing? It does damned well bring it home to read books written before P. E. I even begin to agree with Moore about Sidgwick—that he was a wicked edifactious person.
In so far as this is not just about Moore’s personality, it is about ‘P. E.’, the famous book that he had produced in 1903, Principia Ethica, a book still a great deal more read than The Methods of Ethics—or at least parts of it are, the wrong parts in fact. There are some merits, certainly, that it has of a kind inconceivable in Sidgwick’s work, and which chiefly compelled Keynes’s admiration: an intense conversational tone, at certain points, an immediate persuasive presence. Sidgwick never sounds like that.
But in other respects, especially in argument, Principia Ethica is not as admirable a book as The Methods of Ethics. In fact, despite some fundamental differences in their conclusions, a good deal of it actually comes from Sidgwick, with Moore simply ignoring a number of difficulties which Sidgwick, usually rightly, thought that he had identified. Certainly it was not any theoretical merit of Principia Ethica in comparison to The Methods of Ethics that should have persuaded Keynes that it was the more valuable work. Nor, really, should it have been that Moore’s work was the more spiritually radical. It certainly seemed so: both in the values that it espoused, and in the way it went on about them, it was a good deal less dauntingly earnest than Sidgwick—but that was due in good part to a change in time and temper. As Keynes’s remarks themselves show, there was no more doubt in the world of Principia Ethica than in that of The Methods of Ethics—and perhaps in certain ways less doubt—about the solid foundations of the whole enterprise.
It is a standard criticism of The Methods of Ethics that it is extremely boring. Roy Harrod wrote (p. 76): ‘I remember Alfred Whitehead telling me that he had read The Methods of Ethics as a young man and found it so stodgy that he had been deterred from ever reading any books on ethics since’. Defenders of Sidgwick these days have a tendency to reply to this charge in the general style of the libel lawyer, to the effect that first, it isn’t true, and second, if it is true it is justified by his unflashy concern to get things right in detail. The truth is, first, that a lot of it is boring; second, not all of it is. There are distinct moments of tension which grow out of passages of that very boredom. One might say indeed that the overwhelming Englishness of this book extends even to a similarity to a cricket match, which has the very sophisticated feature that one can only appreciate the significant detail of the monotony that lies before one at a given time because one understands remote and hypothetical moments of excitement which might grow from it. Third, the fact that a lot of The Methods of Ethics is boring is not the most important fact about it. It is not even the most important negative fact about it, because what is most deeply wrong with it emerges in the most interesting bits. Yet, nevertheless, it is still true that there is something revealing about the boringness, and that it has a certain quality which constitutes a quiet sustained comment on what is wrong with the work.
Here we have to recall one or two points about how the book is shaped. The ‘methods of ethics’ to which the title refers are Egoism, Intuitionism and Utilitarianism. As Sidgwick admits, to call Egoism a method of ethics at all may seem rather misleading, since pure Egoism is easily contrasted with the very idea of an ethical outlook. But Sidgwick makes it entirely clear what he is talking about, and it is in fact one of the best features of his undertaking. Like Plato and Aristotle, of whom he said that ‘through a large part of the present work’ their influence had been ‘greater than that of any modern writer’, 5 he regarded the fundamental question of ethics as ‘in what way is it reasonable or rational to live?’—a question to which Egoism might conceivably turn out to provide the answer. If some moral or distinctively ethical (in the narrower sense) answer to that question is to be adopted, then it has to work its passage against Egoism as much as against alternative answers of the moral, non-Egoistic, sort.
The task of adjudicating by reason alone between the claims of Egoism and those of morality was one which Sidgwick was not to claim that he had achieved.6 He was left with the suspicion that it could be achieved only by appealing to religious principles, and those were principles which he neither thought it appropriate to introduce into a science of ethics—which he conceived, distinctively and rather originally, in a secular light—nor was himself prepared to put sufficient faith in.
What he did feel had been achieved by The Methods of Ethics was a demonstration that at any rate the moral option should take the form of the Utilitarian theory. In arriving at this conclusion he engaged in an extensive survey of commonsense morality, in which he set out a good deal of everyday moral thought, or at any rate those conclusions and arguments that might find favour with what he variously calls educated, cultivated, intelligent or morally sensitive persons. The main emphasis of this is to point out the doubtfulness, unclarity, and uncertainty of much of this thought, and the difficulty of deriving its conclusions from any clear and limited set of principles.
It is the aim of deriving these conclusions from such principles that gives the point to the label that Sidgwick attaches to the section of the book in which he surveys commonsense morality. It is the section that is supposed to display the method of ‘Intuitionistic ethics’. It is important in trying to follow Sidgwick’s thought to see what this label does and does not imply. Some writers on ethics, including some later than Sidgwick and indeed Moore himself, made rather a lot of the notion of intuition, as being a particular kind of mental capacity for discerning fundamental ethical truths; and arguments about the existence or possibility of a power of that kind have taken up quite a lot of room in the literature of moral philosophy. They have been concerned, so to speak, with the theory of moral knowledge. However, Sidgwick is actually not very interested in this aspect of the question, which he regards as part of the ‘psychology’ of ethics—and in not being very interested in it he is importantly followed by some contemporary writers such as, notably, Rawls.
In talking about ‘Intuitionism’ Sidgwick is concerned chiefly with a method—the method, roughly, that takes the reflective or even the relatively unreflective convictions of everyday moral thought and uses them to arrive at basic and supposedly certain moral truths or, again, to reach conclusions about unfamiliar cases. However, there are some important ambiguities in how ambitiously such a method is to be taken. At its least ambitious, it looks much like going on as people generally go on—using some cases to think about others, and not being immensely surprised if, as Aristotle always held and the results of Sidgwick’s reflections illustrate, there are no very definite, clear and exceptionless moral principles to be found in everyday thought.
Sidgwick, however, finds this a reproach to commonsense morality; though, as we shall see later, it may be that he finds it a reproach to that morality only if commonsense morality is seen in a certain light, as self-sufficient. He quite certainly finds it a reproach to any theory which tries to derive from that morality a set of clear, definite and certain moral principles which will be specific enough to decide uncertain cases. The outlook that claims to do that he calls dogmatic Intuitionism.7 He is less clear than he might be about what its success would consist in, but he is clear that it fails.
However, there is another, higher, level of Intuitionism of which Sidgwick takes a different view. This, he says, ‘springs from the demand to find some deeper explanation of why conduct commonly judged to be right is so: while accepting the morality of common sense as in the main sound, it still attempts to find for it a philosophical basis which it does not itself offer’. He equates with that the aim of getting one or more principles ‘more absolutely and undeniably true and evident, from which the current rules might be deduced, either just as they are commonly received or with slight modifications and rectifications’ (p. 102).
The conclusion that Sidgwick eventually arrives at is that this task can in fact be carried out—the task, that is to say, of starting from received moral opinion, justifying and explaining a good deal of it in terms of some more general principles and applying those same general principles as a way of criticizing some other parts of received opinion which do not coherently hang together with the rest. This he thinks can be done, but he thinks it can be done only through the principles of Utilitarianism. Indeed, in the end he thinks that the contrast between Intuitionism and Utilitarianism is wrongly drawn, since the only way of correctly carrying out the Intuitionist objective is by reference to Utilitarianism, and the only justification of Utilitarianism itself is, as we shall see, dependent upon certain general principles which are intuitive. One difficulty of the book is that it is formed by a distinction between the Intuitionistic method and the Utilitarian method, which at an ultimate level Sidgwick eventually rejects.
I think that it is this structural feature of the book, the fact that its design is not actually very well adjusted to its conclusions, that helps to make some of it so boring, in particular this survey of commonsense opinion. There are other reasons as well. It is a general feature of the book that the account of commonsense morality is very linear, lacking any sense of the possibility of alternative moral traditions or the idea that certain moral outlooks of cultivated contemporary opinion might represent interests less broad than those of society or mankind as a whole. His discussion for instance of the ethics of making a financial profit out of persons who are in a disadvantaged situation is one example where the notion of commonsense itself demands to be examined in ways in which Sidgwick never examines it. The discussions of sexual morality, again, though they do get mildly more adventurous as we move from Intuitionism to Utilitarianism, continue to make fairly uncritical use of a notion of purity which is no doubt part of what Bloomsbury found oppressive and stuffy.
The lack of any non-moral perspective on the morality of his time is a feature of the work in general. The structural failing that I mentioned before comes out rather in this, that the only example of a theoretical structuring of everyday morality that we are in the end given in the book is the Utilitarian example itself. When Sidgwick is discussing, in the Intuitionist section of the book, an Intuitionist method which is, at that point, supposedly distinct from Utilitarianism, there is no fixed set of expectations against which commonsense opinions are being tested for coherence, definiteness and completeness. We are constantly reminded that there are various kinds of cases to which commonsense seems not to provide an absolutely clear and unambiguous answer. But we need some account of what kind of Intuitionist theory is, as an ideal, in question; and in the absence of that we have no guiding sense of how far we should be disappointed by the absence of these clear and unambiguous answers. Without the guiding notion—and also without, as I have said, any sense of the possibility that social or economic causes might have played some part in all this—the trail of inconclusive commonsense considerations and unresolved commonsense questions is bound to leave a rather dispiriting impression.
While Sidgwick criticized those who wanted to draw up a rational morality distinct from Utilitarianism, it is very important that he nevertheless shared their aspiration to a rational morality. The aim of throwing ‘the morality of commonsense into a scientific form’ (p. 338) was his aim too, and he shared with those Intuitionists the desire to be able to answer moral questions of judgement with a ‘clear and accepted principle’ (p. 249 et al.) It is very revealing of his own outlook that he asks, just before starting on his treatment of Utilitarianism (p. 406), ‘If we are not to systematize human activities by taking universal happiness as their common end, on what other principles are we to systematize them?’.
In 1864, ten years before the publication of The Methods of Ethics, he had written (Schneewind, p. 44): ‘I will hope for any amount of religious and moral development, but I will not stir a finger to compress the world into a system, and it does not at present seem as if it was going to harmonise itself without compression’. Yet in The Methods of Ethics, he certainly came to think that a system was needed which would ideally possess properties of clarity, reflectiveness and consistency, and would be such as to command the general agreement of unprejudiced people. The notion that that is what moral philosophy should produce, and that it is that which gives it power to combat the irrational, the merely personal and the merely habitual, is one which is still very powerfully with us.
No such system can be derived, Sidgwick concludes, by the Intuitionistic method, so long as that method is regarded as operating at a fairly low level of generality, merely considering everyday principles of action or everyday models of virtuous conduct. The consequences of that, we have been shown by the long survey of commonsense opinion, are too often conflicting, unclear and inconclusive. However, if we move to a higher level of generality, there are some principles which when he reflects on them Sidgwick finds to possess geometrical certainty, and which he believes can command universal assent. This is the level of what, as we just saw, he calls ‘philosophical Intuitionism’, where intuition is required to deliver to us only propositions of a very abstract and general kind, which will need interpretation in order to give us definite resolutions of our moral difficulties. He offers us three such fundamental principles. They appear in fact in a variety of formulations, and a great deal of effort could be spent on discussing how those various formulations relate to one another. That, however, does not matter for our present purpose.
The first principle is closely related to that familiar item, the Golden Rule ‘Do to others as you would have them do to you’: one of Sidgwick’s formulations is ‘If a kind of conduct that is right (or wrong) for me is not right (or wrong) for someone else, it must be on the ground of some difference between the two cases, other than the facts that I and he are different persons’.
The second of Sidgwick’s basic principles is a substantive principle of prudence: what it says is that it is rational to pursue ‘one’s good on the whole’ where ‘on the whole’ implies that we should have an ‘impartial concern for all parts of our conscious life’, and ‘Hereafter as such is to be regarded neither less nor more than Now’. Sidgwick explains (p.381):
It is not of course meant that the good of the present may not reasonably be preferred to that of the future on account of its greater certainty: or again, that a week ten years hence may not be more important to us than a week now through an increase in our means or capacities of happiness. All that the principle affirms is that the mere difference of priority and posteriority in time is not a reasonable ground for having more regard for the consciousness of one moment than for that of another.
One consequence of this principle is that ‘a smaller present good is not to be preferred to a greater future good (allowing for difference of certainty)’.
This principle of impartiality over all the times of one’s life is an interesting example of what Sidgwick wants from an intuitive principle, since it is certainly not tautological, and many people find it completely self-evident. Indeed, it is fair to say that almost everybody who agrees with it finds it completely self-evident. However, the trouble is that the world also contains a group of people, distinguished perhaps from the first on grounds of temperament, who find it to an equal degree self-evidently false. I personally am convinced that whatever merits such a principle of impartial prudence may have, it is certainly not a mere derivation from the notion of practical rationality, and does require the introduction of a special attitude towards one’s own life and one’s own future. Whether this is so, is a large and interesting question, which I cannot take any further here. The one remark I would make about it is that Sidgwick’s own discussion of it, and indeed almost all the extensive discussion of it in the recent literature, has taken for granted a large falsehood, namely that the length of time over which this prudence is to be exercised—the extent of one’s conscious life—is something that is given independently of one’s own prudential or other practical reasoning: it is not a matter for one’s own control. This is consistent for Sidgwick, who, at least in The Methods of Ethics, unquestionably accepts, without any comment at all, a prohibition on suicide. Others who do not subscribe to that restriction should for this reason, as well as for a number of others, take another look at that assumption.
The third of Sidgwick’s basic principles which supposedly attract assent from all reflective persons lands us unambiguously in the territory of morality. He writes (p. 382):
So far we have only been considering the ‘Good on the Whole’ of a single individual, but just as this notion is constructed by comparison and integration of the different ‘goods’ that succeed one another in the series of our conscious states, so we have formed the notion of Universal Good by comparison and integration of the goods of all individual human—or sentient—existences. And here again, just as in the former case, by considering the relation of the integrant parts to the whole and to each other, I obtain the self-evident principle that the good of any one individual is of no more importance, from the point of view (if I may say so) of the Universe, 8 than the good of any other . . . and it is evident to me that as a rational being I am bound to aim at good generally—so far as it is attainable by my efforts—not merely at a particular part of it.
This, then, yields a principle of universal benevolence that ‘each one is morally bound to regard the good of any other individual as much as his own, except in so far as he judges it to be less when impartially viewed, or less certainly knowable or attainable by him’.
‘Accordingly’, Sidgwick writes, ‘I find that I arrive, in my search for really clear and certainly ethical intuitions, at the fundamental principle of Utilitarianism’ (p. 387). Sidgwick does in fact think that there remains one further task to be performed, in order to demonstrate that the set of principles which he has identified uniquely determines Utilitarianism as the ethical theory capable of systematizing our moral intuitions—that is the identification of what in this argument has been called universal good with universal happiness. This is, for a rather technical reason, more of a problem for Sidgwick than it is for a modern theorist at a comparable point in the argument. Though Sidgwick’s views on the subject of happiness are quite complex, he fundamentally believes, in the tradition of Bentham and Mill, that happiness is to be interpreted in terms of pleasure—and pleasure is a subject on which he has some complex views. However, a modern Utilitarian is more likely to interpret the ultimate end to which the tradition gives the name ‘happiness’ in terms of satisfaction of desires or some such notion as rational preference. When it is seen in these terms, Sidgwick’s three premises do seem to deliver Utilitarianism virtually immediately. When, motivated by universal benevolence, we are concerned with the good of each person, we are required to be concerned with the very same thing that each of those persons has to be concerned with prudentially in his own case, so it will precisely be something like each person’s objectives or rationally organized set of preferences that will become the raw material of the additive sum of universal good. Indeed, the fact that what we are concerned with is already assumed to be an additive sum, and that universal good is understood already as something that can be globally assessed in some such way, shows how far Sidgwick’s three axioms already determine that the system which is going to satisfy these conditions will be a kind of Utilitarianism. It should also make us wonder once more how far the axioms do have to be accepted as rationally inescapable.
I shall come back to saying something about the merit of the axioms—in particular the last one, which is the one which both distinctively delivers morality, and also delivers this distinctive morality. However, there is one more very important thing to be said first about the way in which Sidgwick actually proceeds to apply the Utilitarian system at which he has now arrived. It is extremely distinctive of his system: it is what enables him, more than anything else, to reconcile his system with large areas of commonsense morality; and it is what very particularly brings out, in my view, a basic fault not only in his results but also in his approach. This is Sidgwick’s insistence, perfectly correct in itself, that it cannot be a desirable result of a moral system that it should imply that actions should always be taken as the result of conscious rational calculation whether it be of prudence or of universal good. It had been an old objection to Utilitarianism that it could lead to a denial of all natural affections and the stifling of impulse and spontaneity in the interests of a calculative spirit directed to universal good. As Schneewind has well shown, this objection was in fact aroused much more by Godwin than it was by Bentham; Godwin’s ferociously rational determination to respect almost any consideration other than those that an ordinary human being would find compelling did considerable damage to the image of Utilitarianism, as well as being something that Godwin, even when he adopted more moderate views in his later years, could never live down. This problem Sidgwick both saw and took resolute steps to avoid. He saw that from the point of view of Utilitarianism it must simply be an empirical question what motivations actually lead to the greatest good; and, in particular, whether the motivation of thinking about the greatest good is likely to lead to the greatest good. The Utilitarian consciousness, then, is itself made a problematical item about which it is necessary to think, and it is at least perfectly possible—and Sidgwick clearly regards it as true—that the Utilitarian consciousness should not, at least in many departments of life, be over-encouraged. Indeed, this is not just a point about the Utilitarian consciousness, although it very strongly applies to that: it is a point about the rationality of deliberation altogether. As Sidgwick puts it (p. 345) the dictates of reason ought always to be obeyed, but it does not follow that the dictation of reason is always a good.
From these considerations Sidgwick can offer a Utilitarian account of various values, particularly of such things as dispositions of character and action, which are often thought of as having an intrinsic or non-Utilitarian value. They include such things as the disposition to tell the truth, to be loyal to one’s friends, to feel a particular affection and concern for one’s own children, and other such items. Such an account plays quite a large role in carrying out the task that Sidgwick assigns to Utilitarian theory, of explaining and also in some sense justifying various parts of commonsense morality which might at first glance not seem to be of Utilitarian inspiration, and which indeed had not seemed to the Intuitionists to be of that inspiration, since they were constantly cited as counter-examples to the Utilitarian outlook. The values of justice, of truth-telling, of spontaneous affection, and so forth, were all items which it seemed the thorough-going Utilitarian would not endorse. But if it is not only permissible but indeed (according to Sidgwick) very important to consider the Utilitarian value of a state of affairs in which people have those dispositions, then the Utilitarian justification could extend much further than had at first been thought.
The business of giving these explanations or justifications is, in Sidgwick, conducted in a slightly desultory way and, in a manner which is shared by large numbers of later Utilitarian writers, he makes pretty cavalier use of what are supposed to be evident matters of fact, which in some cases may invite much the same doubt as the dispositions or rules that they are being invoked to justify. His account of the double standard in sexual morality, to revert to an earlier example, not surprisingly makes use of some fairly ideological material about the differences between the sexes, as well as appealing to such notions as ‘the contagion of unchastity’ (p. 452). In pursuing his project of uncovering what he calls the ‘unconscious Utilitarianism’ (p. 454) of commonsense morality—a phrase which itself raises some extremely pressing issues in the philosophy of social explanation—he is also sometimes guilty of a mistake which, again, turns up in later writers; this is to infer that, because considerations of utility or the greater happiness are quite often used in order to resolve a conflict between two other values, it then follows that those values must all the time be directly or indirectly expressions of the end of utility or the greatest happiness. This simply does not follow.
But the most interesting problems that arise from Sidgwick’s treatment lie not so much in these standard features of the Utilitarian enterprise, but rather in the view his theory requires us to take of these various dispositions themselves. Unsurprisingly, Sidgwick has to treat these dispositions, when he is talking about them theoretically, in a very instrumental way, and the arguments that he produces about them are very linear. The dispositions are regarded just as devices for generating certain actions, and those actions, in the end, as the means by which practical reason produces certain states of affairs, those that most minister to universal good. That is what those dispositions look like when seen from the outside, from the point of view of the teleological Utilitarian consciousness. But it is not what they necessarily or usually seem like from the inside; and indeed what the Utilitarian argument may very well yield is the conclusion that they should not seem like that from the inside. Certainly it is empirically possible, and on the lines of Sidgwick’s argument it must be true, that the dispositions will do the job which the Utilitarian theory has assigned to them only if the agents who possess those dispositions do not see their own character purely instrumentally, but rather see the world from the point of view of that character. Moreover, those dispositions require them to see other things in a non-instrumental light. Though Utilitarianism usually neglects the fact, they are dispositions not simply of action, but of belief and judgement; and they are expressed precisely in ascribing intrinsic and not instrumental value to various activities and relations such as truth-telling, loyalty and so on. Indeed, if Sidgwick is right in saying that the Utilitarian theory explains and justifies larger areas of everyday morality than had been supposed by the Intuitionists, and that he has succeeded in his project of reconciling Utilitarianism and Intuitionism by explaining in Utilitarian terms some of the phenomena on which the Intuitionists were most insistent—if that is so, then it must be that in the actual world the dispositions do present themselves to their possessors, and also present other features of the world, in this non-instrumental light. It was these possessors who, just because they had these dispositions, were so strongly disposed to reject Utilitarianism and insist on the intrinsic value of these actions and ends other than universal good.
It follows that there is a deeply uneasy gap or dislocation in this type of theory between the spirit that is supposedly justified and the spirit of the theory that supposedly justifies it. The gap is not very clearly perceived, if at all, by Sidgwick, nor, in my view, is its significance fully or at all adequately understood by later theorists who have adopted very much Sidgwick’s position. In both Sidgwick’s case and theirs, there is a distinction which has the effect of disguising from them this very deep area of difficulty: a distinction between theory and practice. That distinction, though regularly used, remains remarkably unexamined in this tradition of philosophy; and in fact I believe that if it is examined, it will be found to have, in these connections, virtually no saving power at all.
There is, first, the question of the practice of the theorist himself. The theorist may be presumed—at least as a first presumption—to possess the dispositions of which at a theoretical level he also possesses the Utilitarian justification. So in his mind at least the consciousness that goes with these dispositions, that they are directed to objects of intrinsic value, has to coexist with the consciousness of their justification, that both they and the objects to which they are directed have no intrinsic but only instrumental value. The conditions of this supposed coexistence are by no means easy, and they are hardly ever in Utilitarian writers made clear.
Sidgwick’s failure to confront them is illustrated by the rather famous passage in which he discusses something which from a Utilitarian point of view he is certainly right to discuss, namely whether the Utilitarian theory is itself something which should be made known. He has been discussing exceptions to the general rules:
. . . the Utilitarian may have no doubt that in a community consisting generally of enlightened Utilitarians, these grounds for exceptional ethical treatment would be regarded as valid; still he may, as I have said, doubt whether the more refined and complicated rule which recognises such exceptions is adapted for the community in which he is actually living; and whether the attempt to introduce it is not likely to do more harm by weakening current morality than good by improving its quality. Supposing such a doubt to arise, . . . it becomes necessary that the Utilitarian should consider carefully the extent to which his advice or example are likely to influence persons to whom they would be dangerous: and it is evident that the result of this consideration may depend largely on the degree of publicity which he gives to either advice or example. Thus, on Utilitarian principles, it may be right to do and privately recommend, under certain circumstances, what it would not be right to advocate openly; it may be right to teach openly to one set of persons what it would be wrong to teach to others; it may be conceivably right to do, if it can be done with comparative secrecy, what it would be wrong to do in the face of the world; . . . These conclusions are all of a paradoxical character: there is no doubt that the moral consciousness of a plain man broadly repudiates the general notion of an esoteric morality, differing from that popularly taught; and it would be commonly agreed that an action which would be bad if done openly is not rendered good by secrecy. We may observe, however, that there are strong Utilitarian reasons for maintaining generally this latter common opinion; . . . Thus the Utilitarian conclusion, carefully stated, would seem to be this; that the opinion that secrecy may render an action right which would not otherwise be so should itself be kept comparatively secret; and similarly it seems expedient that the doctrine that esoteric morality is expedient should itself be kept esoteric. Or if this concealment be difficult to maintain, it may be desirable that Common Sense should repudiate the doctrines which it is expedient to confine to an enlightened few. And thus a Utilitarian may reasonably desire, on Utilitarian principles, that some of his conclusions should be rejected by mankind generally; or even that the vulgar should keep aloof from his system as a whole, in so far as the inevitable indefiniteness and complexity of its calculations render it likely to lead to bad results in their hands. (pp. 489–90)
On this kind of account, Utilitarianism emerges as the morality of an élite, and the distinction between theory and practice determines a class of theorists distinct from other persons, theorists in whose hands the truth of the Utilitarian justification of non-Utilitarian dispositions will be responsibly deployed. This outlook accords well enough with the important colonial origins of Utilitarianism. This version may be called ‘Government House Utilitarianism’. It only partly deals with the problem, since it is not generally true, and it was not indeed true of Sidgwick, that Utilitarians of this type, even though they are theorists, are prepared themselves to do without the useful dispositions altogether. So they still have some problem of reconciling the two consciousnesses in their own persons—even though the vulgar are relieved of that problem, since they are not burdened with the full consciousness of the Utilitarian justification. Moreover, Government House Utilitarianism is unlikely, at least in any very overt form, to commend itself today.
A more popular version now is to identify the required distinction between theory and practice as a distinction between the time of theorizing and the time of practice, and to use that notion, deployed in moral philosophy by Butler, of the ‘cool hour’ in which the philosophically disposed moralist reflects on his own principles and practice. There are problems, no less severe, with that model—problems which in fact become deeper and deeper the more that, in some appropriate cool hour, one thinks about them. There is the relatively straightforward artificiality of supposing that the thorough commitment that is required to the values of friendship, truth or whatever it may be, can merely alternate, on a timetable prescribed by calm or activity, with an alien set of reflections. At a rather more interesting level, the model implies an extremely naïve conception of what is going on in the cool hour itself. It is assumed that it is the cool activity of theorizing that will display to oneself the true value of one’s own dispositions and reactions, where I mean by their ‘true’ value, the value that they really have for one. Should that be different from the value that one really believes that they have, when one is not reflecting on the value that one believes they have? The idea that cool and articulated reflection must be authoritatively revealing about one’s structure of values is not itself a very sophisticated belief. Moreover, it can be seen as performing a function.
Utilitarians standardly present everyday unschooled moral reactions as at least presenting a problem of justification, and as running a serious risk of turning out, when unmasked, to be mere prejudices which should be dismissed in the light of Utilitarian reason. But it is at least as plausible, and the history of the subject very strongly suggests that it is true, that the theoretical reasonings of the cool hour are themselves only sustained and directed by some sense of the moral shape of the world as provided by the everyday dispositions. The belief that one can look at all one’s dispositions from the outside, from the point of view of the universe, and that so doing is embodied in a cool hour of personal reflection, is a misrepresentation of that cool hour. What that hour does for one may be not to allow one to assume the point of view of the universe, but rather to disguise the fact that the affections and perceptions that mean most to one may well be not only contingent but also essentially incapable of being made totally transparent to oneself.
A suspicion related to that emerges, too, if one turns away now from the state of consciousness of the Sidgwickian theorist, to the result of his theorizing. Here we must remember what the objections to unreconstructed Intuitionism were, and how it was to be a demand on ethical theory that conflicts, inconsistencies and unclarities in everyday thought should be resolved and some clear principle provided for answering these questions. We left aside at that point the question of why these intellectual improvements were required. The question might indeed scarcely seem worth asking: its answer would generally be supposed to lie, at least to an important extent, in the improvement of practice. If our practice can be related to a more complete and coherent ethical theory, then the questions which in practice (or at very least in the more reflective parts of practice) demand and do not receive an answer—how, for instance, to extend some recognized principle to a new kind of case—can receive some rational resolution. Yet on Sidgwick’s account of the matter it is just very unclear, at the end of the enterprise, how far we have actually advanced towards these objectives.
There is more than one reason for this. First of all, our general unclarities and conflicts and our sense of divergent claims are quite certainly related to the dispositions of action and judgement which we actually possess. Indeed, in his treatment of dogmatic Intuitionism, Sidgwick makes it repeatedly clear how that is so—it is just these various virtues, and various moral ideals related to them, that fail to yield determinate results in various places where he hopes for such results. Yet in the end we learn that it does actually serve the ends of universal good that we should have these dispositions, and that they should be expressed in the field of practice. But if so, then it is for universal good that we should live in a world which presents itself in at least quite a lot of these ways as raising conflict and divergence of sentiment.
To put it another way, these dispositions turn out to be a very valuable element in the world of practice. But that means that divergences of sentiment and various kinds of conflict that flow from those dispositions are themselves part of the world of practice, and the answers that they demand have to come from impulses which are part of the situation as it is actually experienced in the world of practice. It follows that a theory which stands to practice as Sidgwick’s theory does cannot actually serve to eliminate and resolve all conflicts and unclarities in that world of practice, though they are the conflicts that were complained of when the method of Intuitionism was unfavourably reviewed.
It is some consciousness, perhaps, of this point that encourages another feature of Sidgwick’s treatment—again a feature which is displayed in the work of later Utilitarians: namely, that it seems not to matter very much if the immense calculation of additive satisfaction cannot actually be carried out. ‘We have to observe’, Sidgwick writes (p. 439), ‘that the difficulties which we found in the way of determining by the Intuitional method the limits and relative importance of these duties are reduced in the Utilitarian system to difficulties of Hedonistic comparison’.In fact, we are not given many examples, and it is hard to see how we could be, of how those Hedonistic comparisons do actually resolve those conflicts. It seems rather that it is that fact itself, the very idea that those conflicts and obscurities have been reduced to Hedonistic comparison, that provides the intellectual comfort. It seems that the theorist has certain expectations of how practice should respond to theory, and then finds that they are better satisfied by a certain kind of theory than they ever could be by any concrete experience of practice.
Some of the problems presented by Sidgwick’s Utilitarianism and its need for a dissociation between theory and practice, are peculiar to such a Utilitarianism. Other schemas for ethical theory might at least satisfy one test which, as we have seen, Sidgwick’s notably and confessedly failed (though he seems not to have regarded it as a failing), the test of being open; the requirement, that is to say, that if the theory in question governs the practice of a given group, then it must be possible for everyone in that group to know that it does. Rawls’s theory, for instance, reasonably introduces, and itself passes, this test. Yet there are warnings and, I believe, finally negative lessons to be learnt from Sidgwick’s theory by ethical theories in general, even those less extravagantly evasive than his.
Here we have to go back to Sidgwick’s third axiom, the principle of impartiality which stated that from the point of view of the universe the good of any individual is equally valuable. Of course, Sidgwick himself, as we have already explained, immediately sets about to reverse this emphasis, as soon as we get to practice:
. . . each one is morally bound to regard the good of any other individual as much as his own, except in so far as he judges it to be less when impartially viewed, or less certainly knowable or attainable by him. I before observed that the duty of Benevolence as recognised by commonsense seems to fall somewhat short of this. But I think it may be fairly urged in explanation of this that practically each man even with a view to Universal Good, ought chiefly to concern himself with promoting the good of a limited number of human beings, and that generally in proportion to the closeness of their connection with him. (p. 382)
The model is that I, as theorist, can occupy, if only temporarily and imperfectly, the point of view of the universe, and see everything from the outside, including myself and whatever moral or other dispositions, affections or projects, I may have; and from that outside view, I can assign to them a value. The difficulty is, however, as we have already seen, that the moral dispositions, and indeed other loyalties and commitments, have a certain depth or thickness: they cannot simply be regarded, least of all by their possessor, simply as devices for generating actions or states of affairs. Such dispositions and commitments will characteristically be what gives one’s life some meaning, and gives one some reason for living it; they can be said, to varying degrees and variously over time, to contribute to one’s practical or moral identity. There is simply no conceivable exercise that consists in stepping completely outside myself and from that point of view evaluating in to to the dispositions, projects and affections that constitute the substance of my own life.
It is significant that this is not just the point, analogous to an important truth in the philosophy of science, that the Cartesian stance or Archimedean fulcrum is impossible, and that one can only evaluate some beliefs on the basis of others. That is indeed true, and its analogue in moral thought, that some values are needed to evaluate other values, is also true. But that point has already been allowed for in Sidgwick’s theory. There is one evaluative disposition that one takes to the point of view of the universe—or, perhaps one could say, finds waiting there, since it is the same for everyone. That is, simply, the disposition of impartial benevolence—or perhaps, in other versions of ethical theory, some other very general principle of impartiality. But that does not meet the real point, which lies rather in a disanalogy with the philosophy of science. Even though one cannot reconstruct a scientific body of belief starting totally from outside it, nevertheless it is an aim, in reconstructing it, to free one’s view of the world to the maximum degree from perspectives peculiar to one’s historical or local situation—to correct for observer’s bias, and indeed to try to see the universe from the point of view of the universe, that is to say from no distinctive point of view at all. Some contemporary philosophers of science will say, of course, that this objective is actually impossible, but certainly it has been a basic aim of science, and if it is impossible, even as a limiting ideal, then of course so much the worse for any supposed analogy to it in ethical theory. But, whether it is possible or not, the analogy to it presents an insoluble problem to ethical theory. For, I agree with Sidgwick, such a theory must aim to be a theory for practice, and to be closely related to reasons for action. It cannot be a reasonable aim, with regard to that purpose, that I or any other particular person should take as the ideal view of the world—even if one then returns from it to one’s self—a view from no point of view at all. My scientific theory, if I have one, is, as a scientific theory (as opposed to a personal achievement, or a possible means to entry to the Royal Society), only incidentally mine: if it is true, which is what it seems to be, then anyone else’s true theory will to that extent be the same thing. But my life, my action, is quite irreducibly mine, and to require that it is at best a derivative conclusion that it should be lived from the perspective that happens to be mine is an extraordinary misunderstanding. Yet it is that idea that is implicitly contained in the model of the point of view of the universe.
Sidgwick rightly emphasized, as I have said, the conception of ethics as part of the theory of rational conduct. He also held that ethical theory should yield objective truths about what is ultimately valuable. That is not an aspect of his thought which I have emphasized or examined on this occasion. A full enquiry into the possibility of ethical theory, of course, would have to consider what now can be done with such a claim. But I hope that I have at any rate not begged the question against it—I have, if you like, implicitly allowed it to Sidgwick. Yet on that very showing, deep holes reveal themselves in Sidgwick’s account, and an extensive indeterminacy appears in the relations that are supposed to hold between theory and practice.
The thoroughness and care of Sidgwick’s work will only support the belief that this is neither a superficial feature of his outlook, nor one due only to its peculiarities. My own view is that no ethical theory can render a coherent account of its own relation to practice: it will always run into some version of the fundamental difficulty that the practice of life, and hence also an adequate theory of that practice, will require the recognition of what I have called deep dispositions; but at the same time the abstract and impersonal view that is required if the theory is to be genuinely a theory cannot be satisfactorily understood in relation to the depth and necessity of those dispositions. Thus the theory will remain, in one way or another, in an incoherent relation to practice. But if ethical theory is anything, then it must stand in close and explicable relation to practice, because that is the kind of theory it would have to be. It thus follows that there is no coherent ethical theory.
The fact that Sidgwick’s theory so clearly and significantly fails in these respects follows, I believe, simply from the fact that it is so clear and significant an example of an attempt at an ethical theory.
This is substantially the text of the Henry Sidgwick Memorial Lecture 1982, delivered on 18 February. I am grateful to the Principal and Fellows of Newnham College for their invitation to give the lecture. I believe that it may be the first Sidgwick lecture to be concerned with Henry Sidgwick himself.
1 J. B. Schneewind, Sidgwick’s Ethics and Victorian Moral Philosophy (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1977), p. 1.
2 Quoted in Frank Kermode, Romantic Image (London: Fontana, 1971), p. 64.
3 R. F. Harrod, The Life of John Maynard Keynes (London: Macmillan, 1951), pp.116–17.
4 Ibid., p. 114.
5 Henry Sidgwick, The Methods of Ethics, 7th edn (London: Macmillan, 1907; reissued 1962), pp. 375–6.
6 Chiefly because the task must be impossible. However, the difficulties that Sidgwick encounters are certainly heightened by confusions in the distinctively hedonistic part of the theory. See in particular the footnote on pp. 499–500.
7 Schneewind has usefully discussed the problems that arise because Sidgwick actually approaches the discussion of dogmatic intuitionism through some considerations about perfectionism. Sidgwick’s discussion certainly involves his own ‘thin’ view of moral dispositions, criticized below.
8 The phrase recurs at p. 420 without the apology.
TWENTY-FIVE
Wittgenstein and Idealism
1 SOLIPSISM AND THE TRACTATUS
Tractatus 5.62 famously says: ‘what the solipsist means is quite correct; only it cannot be said but makes itself manifest. The world is my world:this is manifest in the fact that the limits of language (of that language which alone I understand) mean the limits of my world.’ The later part of this repeats what was said in summary at 5.6: ‘the limits of my language mean the limits of my world’. And the key to the problem ‘how much truth there is in solipsism’ has been provided by the reflections of 5.61:
Logic pervades the world; the limits of the world are also its limits.
So we cannot say in logic ‘the world has this in it, and this, but not that’.
For that would appear to presuppose that we were excluding certain possibilities, and this cannot be the case, since it would require that logic should go beyond the limits of the world; for only in that way could it view those limits from the other side as well.
We cannot think what we cannot think; so we cannot think what we cannot say either.
Now Wittgenstein says that ‘there is no such thing as the self that thinks and entertains ideas’ (5.631), and this item is presumably the same as what at 5.641 he perhaps loosely, but comprehensibly, calls ‘the human soul with which psychology deals’—that is to say, the item that does not really exist, the thinking and knowing soul in the world, is an item which people look for there as the subject of the phenomena with which psychology deals. In this interpretation I think I am substantially in agreement with P.M.S. Hacker in his book Insight and Illusion:Wittgenstein on Philosophy and the Metaphysics of Experience (OUP, 1972), which I have found helpful on these questions. There are, however, respects in which I would put the position rather differently from him. Hacker, as against Black and others, says that what Wittgenstein does is to deny the existence of a knowing self in the world, and denies it, moreover, on Humean grounds1 to the effect that it cannot be encountered in experience. At the same time, Wittgenstein, under Schopenhauerian influence, does believe in the existence of another, metaphysical or philosophical self, which is ‘the limit of the world, not a part of it’ (5.632, 5.641), and in some such sense he really is a solipsist; only that of course cannot be said, but merely manifests itself. Since Wittgenstein denies the first of these selves and in some way or other accepts the second, he cannot mean them to be the same thing.
Granted the intensely paradoxical and ironical character of Wittgenstein’s thought here, one is in any case in expounding it going to be choosing between different kinds of emphasis. But I would enter two qualifications to Hacker’s account. First, as regards the negative movement against the knowing self, it is not just an unsuccessful Humean search that we are dealing with. Wittgenstein says:
There is no such thing as the subject that thinks or entertains ideas.
If I wrote a book called The World as I Found It, I should have to include a report on my body, and should have to say which parts were subordinate to my will, and which were not, etc., this being a method of isolating the subject, or rather of showing that in an important sense there is no subject; for it alone could not be mentioned in that book. (5.631)
He adds, just before the analogy of the visual field, which I shall not consider (5.633): ‘where in the world is a metaphysical subject to be found . . .?’ This seems to me to say, not just that there was something we were looking for and which turned out not in fact to be in the world—which is Hume’s tone of voice, though the full content of Hume’s negative discovery is not to be found in his failing to find something which he might have found, either. Rather Wittgenstein says: that which I confusedly had in mind when I set out to look is something which could not possibly be in the world. Hacker’s emphasis is: there is one specification, which is the specification of a possible empirical thing, and to that nothing as a matter of fact corresponds; but there is a quasi-specification of a non-empirical thing to which something does, in a way, correspond. But rather, what we first looked for was never a possible empirical thing. For it had to satisfy the condition of being something in the world as I experience it and yet at the same time necessarily there whenever anything was there, and there could not be anything which did that. This is why Wittgenstein can explain his thought in this connection by saying (5.634) that no part of our experience is at the same time a priori (the phrase translated ‘at the same time’ is important here). Thus Wittgenstein’s thought is, as Hacker indeed says, very like Kant’s criticism of the Cartesian res cogitans.
The other qualification affects the other half of the argument. We cannot in any straightforward sense say that there is, or that we can believe in, or accept, a metaphysical, transcendental, self instead; for neither what it is, nor that it is, can be said, and attempts to talk about it or state its existence must certainly be nonsense. That is why, as we have already seen, the non-occurrence of a subject in the book of The World as I Found It means that ‘in an important sense there is no subject’. The sense in which it is a limit, also means that at the limit, it is not anything at all (5.64):
Here it can be seen that solipsism, when its implications are followed out strictly, coincides with pure realism. The self of solipsism shrinks to a point without extension and there remains the reality coordinated with it.
Indeed, granted this, I find puzzling why Wittgenstein can say (5.641)that there really is a sense in which philosophy can talk about the self in a non-psychological way. But I take this to mean that philosophy can talk about it in the only way in which by the end of the Tractatus, we find that philosophy can talk about anything: that is to say, not with sense.
Whatever exactly we make of that, we can recover from the Tractatus discussion of the self and solipsism three ideas which will be particularly important as points of reference in what follows: that the limits of my language are the limits of my world; that there could be no way in which those limits could be staked out from both sides—rather, the limits of language and thought reveal themselves in the fact that certain things are nonsensical; and (what follows from the first two, but is an important point to emphasise) that the ‘me’ and ‘my’ which occur in those remarks do not relate to an ‘I’ in the world, and hence we cannot conceive of it as a matter of empirical investigation (as the Tractatus is fond of putting it, a matter of ‘natural science’) to determine why my world is this way rather than that way, why my language has some features rather than others, etc. Any sense in which such investigations were possible would not be a sense of ‘my’, or indeed, perhaps, of ‘language’, in which the limits of my language were the limits of my world.
It may seem that these ideas are foremost among those that Wittgenstein abandoned in his later work, and that they, and the forms of puzzlement which gave rise to them, were particular objects of the criticisms of the Investigations. In a sense that is true, and Hacker devotes a good deal of his book to explaining how the later interest in such things as the impossibility of a private language and the necessity for public criteria is related to a long-term project of exorcising solipsism—exorcising it even from some vanishing and unsayable transcendental redoubt. The later arguments about oneself and others are designed (among other things) to remove the need even to try to point, hopelessly, in a solipsistic direction. That need certainly exists in the Tractatus. The well-charted moves in the later work from ‘I’ to ‘we’ mark one and the most evident attempt to banish that need; equally the emphasis in the later work on language’s being an embodied, this-worldly, concrete social activity, expressive of human needs, as opposed to the largely timeless, unlocated and impersonal designatings of the Tractatus—that emphasis also can naturally be thought of as a rejection of the transcendental and Schopenhauerian aspects of the earlier work: the transcendentales Geschwätz, the ‘transcendental twaddle’ as Wittgenstein wrote to Engelmann in a different context in 1918 (quoted by Hacker, p. 81).
But the question is not as simple as this, and my chief aim will be to suggest that the move from ‘I’ to ‘we’ was not unequivocally accompanied by an abandonment of the concerns of transcendental idealism. To some extent, the three ideas I mentioned are not so much left behind, as themselves take part in the shift from ‘I’ to ‘we’: the shift from ‘I’ to ‘we’ takes place within the transcendental ideas themselves. From the Tractatus combination (as Hacker justly puts it) of empirical realism and transcendental solipsism, the move does not consist just in the loss of the second element. Rather, the move is to something which itself contains an important element of idealism. That element is concealed, qualified, overlaid with other things, but I shall suggest that it is there. I shall suggest also that this element may help to explain a particular feature of the later work, namely a pervasive vagueness and indefiniteness evident in the use Wittgenstein makes of ‘we’.
2 SOLIPSISM AND IDEALISM
Hacker says (p. 59) that an aim of his book is ‘to show that the detailed refutation of solipsism and hence of idealism, which Wittgenstein produced in the 1930s and incorporated, in low key, in the Investigations, is directed against views which he himself held as a young man’. A refutation ‘of solipsism and hence of idealism’: this is a connexion of ideas, not immediately self-evident, which Hacker makes throughout. Thus at p. 214:
The solipsist claimed that the present moment is unique, that he is privileged, that it is always he who sees, that what he has when he sees is unique, that his seeing is exceptional, that ‘this’ is incomparable. Each move is illegitimate. The illegitimacy of each move damns not just solipsism, but phenomenalism and indeed any form of idealism.
Yet it is not at all obvious that everything which could pointfully be called a form of idealism, or indeed which has been so called by the history of philosophy, would necessarily be refuted by arguments which, by undermining a private language, removed the supposed privileged first-person immediacies which are the basis of solipsism, whether expressed or presupposed.
To phenomenalism, which Hacker mentions, such criticism can indeed be extended, and it may help towards the business of sketching a kind of idealism to which that criticism does not extend, if we first consider one or two points about phenomenalism. Phenomenalists used stoutly to hold that it was a crass misunderstanding to regard their theory as any form of idealism. If they were right at all in holding that, clearly their denial applies at best only to non-transcendental idealism—which we may call, following Kant, empirical idealism, and which we can define for our present purposes as a form of idealism which regards the existence of the material world as dependent on minds which are themselves things in the world, empirical beings whose existence or non-existence is a matter of contingent fact.
In fact, it is not clear that phenomenalism even manages to avoid being that. The question of whether it does or not, turns on the issue of the status of the hypothetical observers whose equally hypothetical sense-data constitute the content, under phenomenalist translation, of statements about unobserved portions of the material world. If they are regarded as empirical items, then there may be a difficulty about phenomenalism’s steering clear of empirical idealism. For if it is to do that, and so maintain its professed stance as a realist theory at the empirical level, then it must be able to translate into its language any comprehensible empirical proposition which denies the mind-dependence of material objects: thus phenomenalists are happy to translate into their language, as they hope, propositions saying that there were rocks, etc. in certain spaces before there were any observers of them. But what about the following proposition, which seems to be a comprehensible and indeed true empirical proposition in the material object language: ‘Even if there were not any observers, certain material objects would exist’? If phenomenalist observers are empirical items, the question of their existence is an empirical question—the same empirical question, indeed, as is raised by the antecedent of that conditional. Thus the phenomenalist translation of that conditional must be of the form: if P were not the case, then if P were the case, then Q, and it is not, to say the least of it, clear that that is satisfactory.
If that cannot be made satisfactory, then phenomenalism cannot adequately represent in its terms a proposition which constitutes a basic empirical denial of mind-dependence. It will be thus a form of empirical idealism. But even if we dispose of that, phenomenalism will still be a kind of transcendental idealism. Suppose that we eliminate the antecedents of the phenomenalist sentences which merely hypothesise the existence of observers, and which are there just as a universal condition of the analysis. Thus we make the so-called existence of observers a redundant condition on the occurrence of sense-data. Then genuinely empirical statements about the existence or non-existence of observers, such as the antecedent of the material object statement we considered just now, can be translated into the phenomenalist language: in some such form, presumably, as statements of the existence of Humean aggregations of sense-data. Then the sense-data which are the raw materials of the phenomenalist translations (including those sense-data aggregations of which constitute the empirical existence of observers) will not, as such, have a subject, and it is obvious from what has just been said why they cannot, as such, have a subject. The only candidate for a subject recognisable to phenomenalism will be the empirical observer, but his existence has now been represented as the contingent aggregation of items which already, and even outside such an aggregation, have the character of sense-data. As Carnap said in the Logische Aufbau, ‘das Gegebene ist subjektlos’, the given has no subject.
But it is still the given: and unless phenomenalism is to surrender its basically epistemological way of introducing one to these items, and its references to their being, or being related to, observations, they must remain items of which we have been given no adequate grasp unless they are in some sense mental. Neutral monism perhaps attempted to drop that implication, but to the limited extent that it progressed in that attempt, it seems not to leave one with any adequate bearings on the items in question at all. But then, while no form of mind-dependence of the world can be truly asserted in the phenomenalist language, the fact that its raw materials are of this character, and the fact that it is basically the language, 3 these facts show that the world is mental. We cannot say (except empirically and falsely) that the world is the world of experience:rather, its being the world of experience conditions everything we say. That is what it is for phenomenalism to be a form of transcendental idealism, a form which indeed is liable to the same objections as Wittgenstein, faced with solipsism, made to such things as the empiricist theory of meaning. Those objections are directed to starting with supposed first-person immediacies, and phenomenalism incurs them because that in terms of which it represents the world cannot be understood except in terms of first-person immediacies.
Thus phenomenalism is one or another form of idealism, and in either form is exposed, as much as solipsism, to the later Wittgenstein arguments. But, to turn away now from phenomenalism, must anything which could be called idealism have this character? Hacker, as I have mentioned, assumes that it is so. His reason for that emerges when he says (p. 216) that ‘idealism in most of its forms’—that is his one qualification—is just a half-hearted form of solipsism which has not been thought through with the consistency of solipsism; thus also he refers (p. 71) to Schopenhauer’s ‘glib dismissal’ of solipsism. Idealism is regarded just as a kind of aggregative solipsism. That is indeed ridiculous, 4 but if the idea that the limits of my language mean the limits of my world can point to transcendental solipsism, then perhaps there is a form of transcendental idealism which is suggested, not indeed by the confused idea that the limits of each person’s language mean the limits of each person’s world, but by the idea that the limits of our language mean the limits of our world. This would not succumb to the arguments which finished off solipsism, for those arguments are all basically about the move from ‘I’ to ‘we’, and that, in this version, has already been allowed for.
I think that there is such a view implicit in some of Wittgenstein’s later work. To see what such a view will be like, we can try to follow an analogy between this, first-person plural, view, and the first-person singular transcendental view which we have already touched on. First and most basically it is essential that the proposition that the limits of our language mean the limits of our world should be taken neither as a blank tautology, nor as an empirical claim. It would be a mere tautology if it meant something like: whoever are meant by ‘we’, it is going to be true that what we understand, we understand, and what we have heard of and can speak of, we have heard of and can speak of, and what we cannot speak of, we cannot speak of. Certainly. But the singular versions of those truisms were not just what was meant when it was said originally that the limits of my language meant the limits of my world. Nor, in that original case, did we intend an empirical thought, in which I both take myself as something in the world and make it depend on me. That is precisely what we left behind in distinguishing transcendental from empirical idealism. Now, we do not mean the plural analogue of that empirical monomania, either, and that is one way in which our statement is not an empirical statement.
There are other, and important, ways in which it is not an empirical statement. Thus the claim that the limits of our language mean the limits of our world might be construed empirically in this way, by taking language narrowly, to refer to one’s system of communication, its grammatical categories, etc., and world widely, to mean how in general the world appears to one, and the general framework of comprehension one applies to things; then, taking ‘we’ relatively to various linguistic groups, one would have the hypothesis, perhaps to be ascribed to Whorf, that the way things look to different groups profoundly depends on what their language is like. I shall come back to certain relativist questions raised by such theories. For the moment the aim is just the general one of illuminating by contrast the non-empirical character of an idealist interpretation of our slogan. If we are dealing with a genuinely empirical theory of this ‘Whorfian’ sort, then a given group’s language should provide some sort of an empirical explanation, if only a very weak one, of its way of looking at the world. Connectedly, we could explain some particular person’s way of looking at the world, or some aspect of that, by reference to the language group he or she belonged to. But all that cancels the force of the essentially first-personal, even though plural, formulation we are dealing with. An idealist interpretation will not be served by anything that merely puts any given ‘we’ in the world and then looks sideways at us. Under the idealist interpretation, it is not a question of our recognising that we are one lot in the world among others, and (in principle at least) coming to understand and explain how our language conditions our view of the world, while that of others conditions theirs differently. Rather, what the world is for us is shown by the fact that we can make sense of some things and not of others: or rather—to lose the last remnants of an empirical and third-personal view—in the fact that some things and not others make sense. Any empirical discovery we could make about our view of the world, as that it was conditioned by our use of count-words or whatever, would itself be a fact which we were able to understand in terms of, and only in terms of, our view of the world; and anything which radically we could not understand because it lay outside the boundary of our language would not be something we could come to explain our non-understanding of—it could not become clear to us what was wrong with it, or with us.
Here, in the contrast with a mere tautology and, very basically, in the contrast with an empirical view, we can begin to see an analogy between the plural view and the original first-person singular transcendental view. But still; why idealism? Enough reason, I think, is to be found in the considerations, rough as they are, which we have already put together, and which will serve also to tie those to certain identifiable concerns of the later Wittgenstein. Since the fact that our language is such and such, and thus that the world we live in is as it is, are, as presently construed, transcendental facts, they have no empirical explanation. Anything that can be empirically explained, as that certain external features of the world are this way rather than that, or that we (as opposed to the Hopi Indians, or again as opposed to cats) see things in a certain way, or deal with things in one way rather than another—all these fall within the world of our language, and are not the transcendental facts. In particular, in the sense in which we are now speaking of ‘our language’, there could be no explanation of it, or correlation of it with the world, in sociological terms, or zoological, or materialistic, in any of the several current senses of that expression. Indeed there could not be an explanation of it which was ‘idealistic’, in the explanatory sense of that term often used, e.g. by Marxist writers, of an explanation given in terms of conditioning ideas or thoughts, for there are no ideas or thoughts out-side it to condition it. However, while we could not explain it in any of those ways, we could in a way make it clearer to ourselves, by reflecting on it, as it were self-consciously exercising it; not indeed by considering alternatives—for what I am presently considering can have no comprehensible alternatives to it—but by moving around reflectively inside our view of things and sensing when one began to be near the edge by the increasing incomprehensibility of things regarded from whatever wayout point of view one had moved into. What one would become conscious of, in so reflecting, is something like: how we go on. And how we go on is a matter of how we think, and speak, and intentionally and socially conduct ourselves: that is, matters of our experience.
As phenomenalism, regarded as a form of transcendental idealism, gave everything in terms of something mental, though in the only sense in which it could say that everything was mental, that statement was false; so our language, in this sense in which its being as it is has no empirical explanation, shows us everything as it appears to our interests, our concerns, our activities, though in the only sense in which we could meaningfully say that they determined everything, that statement would be false. The fact that in this way everything can be expressed only via human interests and concerns, things which are expressions of mind, and which themselves cannot ultimately be explained in any further terms: that provides grounds, I suggest, for calling such a view a kind of idealism (and not of the stupid ‘aggregative’ kind). The history of post-Kantian philosophy might in any case lead one to expect that there would be a place for such a view.
3 RELATIVISM
We have here, in a vague sketch, the outline of a view. I have not yet offered any grounds for the claim that Wittgenstein held it. In fact, I am not going to claim anything as strong as that he held it. It seems to me that both the nature of the view, and the nature of the later Wittgenstein material, make it hard to substantiate any unqualified claim of that kind. I offer this model and its implied connection with the earlier work as a way of looking at and assessing that later material. But I will offer some considerations which suggest that the influence of the sort of view I have sketched is to be felt in the later work, and that reference to it may help to explain some curious and unsatisfactory features of that work. In particular it may help us to understand the use that Wittgenstein makes of ‘we’. To reach any understanding on that matter, we have to approach it through the uninviting terrain of relativism.
In trying to distinguish a little while ago the transcendental version of ‘the limits of our language mean the limits of our world’ from an empirical version, I suggested one possible empirical version which I cavalierly labelled the Whorfian hypothesis, to the effect that language (narrowly construed) conditioned world-view (broadly construed). That was useful as an example (whether or not it represents the views of Whorf). It contains, we should now notice, three different elements. The first is that it takes language in a narrow sense, and the second is that it offers language in that sense as the explanation of the world-view. The third feature is that what are explained, or would be if there were a true such theory, 5 are various different world-views, held by different human sub-groups: there is more than one lot to call themselves ‘we’. Now that of course follows from the first two points, since language in the narrow sense differs in the supposedly relevant respects between human groups. But, while still offering an empirical theory, one could drop the first point and keep the second and third: thus one would suppose that there were empirical explanations of differences in local world-view, but they did not lie in differences of language in the narrow sense.
Now as to the first point, I take it that Wittgenstein was not very interested, in these connections, in language in the narrow sense, and that he characteristically uses the term ‘language’ in a very extensive way, to embrace world-view rather than to stand in narrow and explanatory contradistinction to it. Hence his notoriously generous use of the expression ‘language-game’; hence also, in the converse direction as it were, the tendency to use ‘form of life’ to refer to some quite modest linguistic practice. As Putnam6 has justly said, ‘(the) fondness (of Wittgensteinians) for the expression “form of life” appears to be directly proportional to its degree of preposterousness in a given context’. The narrower sense of ‘language’ seems not to be an important factor in any explanations Wittgenstein would want to consider for variations of world-view between human groups. The question arises, then, of whether he is interested in any explanations at all.
I think in fact he is not basically interested in such explanations, and for a reason which I shall suggest ties up with our central question. Nevertheless at times he says things which would prima facie not rule out the possibility of explanation. At least, he thinks that a different way of looking at and talking about the world might become comprehensible in terms of different interests:
For here life would run on differently.—What interests us would not interest them. Here different concepts would no longer be unimaginable. In fact, this is the only way in which essentially different concepts are imaginable. (Zettel, 388)
Suggestions of a similar kind are to be found in the neighbourhood (378, 380), and in the preceding fragment a hint at a more specific kind of explanation might be detected (though hardly one which justifies what sounds like a tone of mild daring):
I want to say an education quite different from ours might also be the foundation for quite different concepts. (387)
In the work On Certainty, again, we have the recognition that a ‘language- game’ changes over time (256), and the model of the river (96 seq.), in which some hardened propositions can form the bank, which guides other more fluid propositions, but over time new bits may accumulate and old bits be swept away—this offers the fact of diachronic change, and it does not exclude, even if it does not encourage, the possibility of explaining such change. Thus both over time and over social space, variety and change are possible, and, so far as this goes, presumably we might have some explanations of that variety and change. Other ways of seeing the world are not imaginatively inaccessible to us; on the contrary, it is one of Wittgenstein’s aims to encourage such imagination. We can consider alternatives, as in the examples I have already mentioned— and there are of course many more in which he suggests how people with different interests and concerns might describe, classify, and see the world differently from us. Thus the different world-pictures, as so far introduced, are not inaccessible to one another. Those who had one picture might come to see the point (in terms of interests, etc.) of another picture, and also perhaps come to understand why those who had it, did so. In that light, they could reflect also on their own world-picture, and understand, perhaps, something of why they had it. Thus in speaking of these various languages or world-pictures, it looks as though we are not speaking of things to which their subjects are, in terms of the idealism we have discussed, transcendentally related.
Now none of this yet implies anything about the evaluative comparability of different world-pictures. We have said that they are accessible to one another, to some extent, but that does not say anything, or anything much, about whether one could compare them with regard to adequacy. With regard, moreover, to those elements in the world-picture which purport to be truth-carrying, nothing has yet been determined about whether there is some objective basis from which one ‘we’ could come to recognise the greater truth of what was believed by another ‘we’. But in fact, as is well known, Wittgenstein tends to say things which cast great doubt on that possibility, and not least in his last work. Thus On Certainty says (94):
I do not get my picture of the world [Weltbild] by satisfying myself of its correctness; nor do I have it because I am satisfied of its correctness. No: it is the inherited background against which I distinguish between true and false.
95. The propositions describing this world-picture might be part of a kind of mythology. And their role is like that of rules of a game; and the game can be learned purely practically, without learning any explicit rules.
And, revealingly, On Certainty, 298:
‘We are quite sure of it’ does not mean just that every single person is certain of it, but that we belong to a community which is bound together by science and education.
There are many remarks, again, which claim such things as that reasons can be given only within a game, and come to an end at the limits of the game (Philosophische Grammatik, p. 55), that our mode of representation is a language-game (Philosophical Investigations, p. 50), that ‘grammar’ cannot be justified (Philosophische Bermerkungen, p. 7), and that the language-game is not reasonable or unreasonable, but is there, like our life (On Certainty, 559). Nor is there any doubt that Wittgenstein included in the force of these remarks the kind of language-game which one human group might pursue and another lack. Thus in On Certainty, once more:
609. Suppose we met people who did not regard that (sc. the propositions of physics) as a telling reason. Now, how do we imagine this?Instead of the physicist, they consult an oracle. (And for that we consider them primitive.) Is it wrong for them to consult an oracle and be guided by it?—If we call this ‘wrong’ aren’t we using our language-game as a base from which to combat theirs?
610. And are we right or wrong to combat it? Of course there are all sorts of slogans which will be used to support our proceedings . . .
612. I said I would ‘combat’ the other man, —but wouldn’t I give him reasons? Certainly; but how far do they go? At the end of reasons comes persuasion. (Think of what happens when missionaries convert natives.)
Now none of this, nor its negation, will follow from the idea just of different human groups empirically co-existing with different world-pictures which are (in the earlier, unambitious, sense) accessible to one another. Nor does it follow from a view or set of views which I have not so far mentioned, but which I shall come back to briefly at the end of these remarks, namely the view which has been charted by Dummett in much recent work, to the effect that truth must be replaced by, or interpreted in terms of, the notion of conditions which justify assertion. This view I shall summarily call Wittgenstein’s constructivism. While constructivism must bring enquiry and speculation to a halt in what we have been trained to perceive as an adequate ground, this entails nothing about what different human groups may or may not have been trained to perceive as such a ground, nor about what they could be trained to perceive as a ground, nor about what they would find it natural to do when con-fronted with conflicts with what they think they already know. Constructivism might tell us something about human knowledge, not about that of narrower groups.
The relativist elements which have been added to this scene are extra, and do not follow from the rest. But once they are there, they have a curious and confusing effect backwards (so to speak) on the rest. For it will be remembered that one consideration that I used in characterising a transcendental interpretation of ‘the limits of our language mean the limits of our world’ was that the features of our language, so conceived, were not a matter of empirical explanation; and hence, conversely, that when we were dealing with what could be empirically explained, we had no such transcendentally isolated item. But if we add the relativist views, it looks as though the question, whether something is empirically explicable or not, is itself relative to a language; for such explanation, and a fortiori, particular forms of scientific explanation, are just some language-games among others. Thus our view of another world-picture, as something accessible, and empirically related, to ours, may just be a function of our world-picture; as, of course, may our supposed understanding of signs coming from the other group that they have the same feeling. Thus we lose hold at this level on the idea that they are really accessible. Once that alarm has broken out, we may indeed even begin to lose the hard-earned benefits of ‘we’ rather than ‘I’. For if our supposed scientific understanding of the practices of other groups is to be seen merely as how those practices are for us, and if our experience of other forms of life is inescapably and non-trivially conditioned by our own form of life, then one might wonder what after all stops the solipsist doubt, that my experience which is supposedly of other individuals and the form of life which I share with them, cannot fail to be an experience only of how things are for me.
The point can be put also like this, that there is the gravest difficulty (familiar from certain positions in the philosophy of the social sciences) in both positing the independent existence of culturally distinct groups with different world-views, and also holding that any access we have to them is inescapably and non-trivially conditioned by our own world-view. For the very question from which we started, of the existence and relative accessibility of different world-views, becomes itself a function of one world-view. In fact what we have here is an exact analogue, at the social level, of aggregative solipsism.
So far as the social sciences are concerned, it is worth mentioning a certain view which is held by some followers of Wittgenstein, and which perhaps receives confused encouragement from the area we are considering. This is a view to the effect that it is possible to understand and at least piece-meal explain other outlooks, so long as the understanding is internalist and the explanation non-causal.7 To suppose that that followed from general epistemological considerations at the level we are considering would be a muddle, representing something like aggregative solipsism (at the social level). For if relativist inaccessibility has taken over, then there are only two options: either one is submerged in, identical with an original member of, the other social system, in which case one has no explanations at all (except its own, if it happens to be self-conscious); or else one is necessarily bringing to it one’s own conceptual outlook, in which case that will be no less so if what one is bringing is Verstand and Gestaltist redescription, than if one is bringing causal explanation. Of course, there may be other good reasons for preferring the former type of explanation, but the project cannot just follow from some relativist story about the plurality of human language-games, as seems sometimes to be supposed.
The relativist elements introduce a persistent uncertainty in the interpretation of ‘we’, which not only makes the application of Wittgenstein’s views unclear, but makes it unclear what kind of views they are. His references to conceptual change and to the different outlooks of different groups have a persistent vagueness which leaves it unclear how much room there is supposed to be for explanation. I earlier mentioned various cases in which Wittgenstein at least seemed to leave room for the possibility of explanation. But the range or determinacy of the explanations he left room for were, so far as the suggestions offered there went, exceedingly low—thus Wittgenstein referred sometimes in the weakest terms to what other people might find interesting, or related their practice in some broadly functional way to their interests. In some part, no doubt, these features of the work are owed to Wittgenstein’s hatred of the cockiness of natural science, something which seems to me not easy in his case to distinguish from a hatred of natural science. His use of Gestaltist illumination can stun, rather than assist, further and more systematic explanation; to adapt a remark of Kreisel’s, 8 when the child asks why the people on the other side of the world don’t fall off, many would give an explanation in terms of gravity acting towards the centre of the earth, but Wittgenstein would draw a circle with a pin man on it, turn it round, and say, ‘now we fall into space’.
Beyond that, however, the difficulties we have now run into raise the question of whether Wittgenstein is really thinking at all in terms of actual groups of human beings whose activities we might want to understand and explain. I think the answer to that is basically ‘no’; we are not concerned so much with the epistemology of differing world-views, still less with the methodology of the social sciences, as with ways of exploring our world-view. We are concerned with the imagination, and the vaguely functionalist remarks we noticed before are not the sketch of an explanation, but an aid to the imagination, to make a different practice a more familiar idea to us, and hence to make us more conscious of the practice we have. Seen in this light, the alternatives are not the sort of socially actual alternatives, relativistically inaccessible or not, which we have been discussing, nor are they offered as possible objects of any kind of explanation. Rather, the business of considering them is part of finding our way around inside our own view, feeling our way out to the points at which we begin to lose our hold on it (or it, its hold on us), and things begin to be hopelessly strange to us. The imagined alternatives are not alternatives to us; they are alternatives for us, markers of how far we might go and still remain within our world—a world leaving which would not mean that we saw something different, but just that we ceased to see.
4 NON-RELATIVIST IDEALISM
Relativism, then, is not really the issue. While the ‘we’ of Wittgenstein’s remarks often looks like the ‘we’ of our group as contrasted with other human groups, that is basically misleading. Such a ‘we’ is not his prime concern, and even if one grants such views as the ‘justified assertion’ doctrine, the determination of meaning by social practice and so on, all of that leaves it open, how much humanity shares in the way of rational practice. Nor is it just a question of a final relativisation of ‘we’ to humanity. We cannot exclude the possibility of other language-using creatures whose picture of the world might be accessible to us. It must, once more, be an empirical question what degree of conceptual isolation is represented by what groups in the universe—groups with which we would be in the universe. If they are groups with which we are in the universe, and we can understand that fact (namely, that they are groups with a language, etc.), then they also belong to ‘we’. Thus, while much is said by Wittgenstein about the meanings we understand being related to our practice, and so forth, that we turns out only superficially and sometimes to be one we as against others in the world, and thus the sort of we which has one practice as against others which are possible in the world. Leaving behind the confused and confusing language of relativism, one finds oneself with a we which is not one group rather than another in the world at all, but rather the plural descendant of that idealist I who also was not one item rather than another in the world.
But if that is the kind of we one is concerned with, it would, again, not follow (at least from this very general level of consideration) that any limit could be placed in advance on the scientific understanding of human practice and human meanings. For if we empirically differ from other groups in the universe with regard to the world-picture we have, then it might be possible to find an explanation of that difference, in terms of our differing evolution, our situation in different environments in the universe, or whatever. But if we could do that for ourselves (that is, humanity) if there turned out to be others to compare ourselves with, then it could not be impossible, though it might be harder, to do it for ourselves without our knowing of others, or without there being others. Even if we, humanity, were the only lot in the world, a transcendental idealism of the first-person plural could not rule out in itself the possibility of an empirical or scientific understanding of why, as persons who have evolved in a particular way on a particular planet, we have the kind of world-picture we have—even though such an explanation would, once more, have to lie within the limits of our language, in the only sense of ‘our’ in which they would mean the limits of our world. But if all that is possible, there is little left of the thought that those limits are limits at all: it might turn out with this sort of idealism, too, that ‘when its implications are followed out strictly, it coincides with pure realism’.
Yet when that was so in the Tractatus case, the work itself, notoriously and professedly, tried nevertheless to go beyond it. I will end by suggesting that the later work may be seen also as trying to do that, or rather not preventing itself from doing that, with its own elements of a pluralised idealism. This concerns what I earlier called the ‘constructivism’. This has many roots, particularly in the theory of knowledge, which I shall not try to say anything about. But a central thought it contains is one that can be put by saying that our sentences have the meaning we give them, and from that some important consequences are supposed to follow, with regard to their logic not being able to determine reality beyond, so to speak, what was put into it in the first place. Relatedly, the notion of ‘truth’ is to be replaced by, or interpreted in terms of, an appeal to the conditions which have been determined to be appropriate for the assertion of a given sentence.9 But it is not easy to see, at least at first, how if this set of views is not a triviality, which has no important consequences at all, it can avoid having quite amazing consequences. For consider the following argument-schema, which I have discussed in a slightly different form elsewhere:
(i) ‘S’ has the meaning we give it.
(ii) A necessary condition of our giving ‘S’ a meaning is Q.
ergo (iii) Unless Q, ‘S’ would not have a meaning.
(iv) If ‘S’ did not have a meaning, ‘S’ would not be true.
ergo (v) Unless Q, ‘S’ would not be true.
It looks as though there should be something wrong with this argument, since any number of substitutions for Q in (ii) which relate to human existence, language use, etc., make it true for any ‘S’ one likes, and since (i) is supposedly true for any ‘S’, and (iv) for any true ‘S’, we can get the truth of any true ‘S’ dependent on human existence, etc.; that is, prove unrestricted idealism. Now on some traditional views, there is no need to find anything wrong with the argument in order to avoid this, since (i) will be taken to be true just in case “ ‘S’ ” names a sentence, and in that case (v) can be harmlessly true, as meaning “Unless Q, ‘S’ would not express a truth”, and that of course will not entail: Unless Q, not S. But it is not obvious that for later Wittgensteinian views, and in particular for the theory of justified assertion, we can so easily drive a line between the sentence ‘S’ expressing the truth, and what is the case if S. Wittgenstein does indeed sometimes speak in these connections as though he were talking simply about the sentences of natural languages, and produces some very odd results, as at PI, I, 381:
How do I know that this colour is red?—It would be an answer to say:
‘I have learnt English’.
which is a translation of
Wie erkenne ich, daß diese Farbe Rot ist?—Eine Antwort wäre: ‘Ich habe Deutsch gelernt’.
But at least that is a case of someone’s knowing something, and the difficulties, though revealing, are comparatively superficial. But if we are considering what would be true if . . ., and if we are to replace the notion of truth-conditions with that of assertion-conditions, and if we are to grant, what Wittgenstein surely holds, that for anything to have come to be an assertion-condition for a given sentence involves certainly a human practice, and perhaps a human decision; then something has to be done if we are to avoid even empirical idealism. The obvious thing to do is to regard talk about what would be the case if there were no human beings, language, etc., as talk about what would justify the assertion of certain sentences which we do understand (of which the assertion-conditions are fixed). That banishes the empirical idealism, since it removes any reference to convention-fixing from the hypothetical unpopulated scene, nor does it record any piece of convention-fixing. But it would give reason to reflect that any given supposition is determinate only because, on the theory, there is at some point a decision to count certain conditions as adequate for assertion. That reflection is more radical, and is meant to be more radical, than the banal thought in standing back from a sentence describing a non-human event, that if there were no human events there would be no such sentence. The point comes out rather in the thought that the determinacy of reality comes from what we have decided or are prepared to count as determinate:
We have a colour system as we have a number system. Do the systems reside in our nature or in the nature of things? How are we to put it?—Not in the nature of numbers or colours. (Zettel, 357)
The diffidence about how to put it comes once more from a problem familiar in the Tractatus: how to put a supposed philosophical truth which, if it is uttered, must be taken to mean an empirical falsehood, or worse. For of course, if our talk about the numbers has been determined by our decisions, then one result of our decisions is that it must be non-sense to say that anything about a number has been determined by our decisions. The dependence of mathematics on our decisions, in the only sense in which it obtains—for clearly there cannot be meant an empirical dependence on historical decisions—is something which shows itself in what we are and are not prepared to regard as sense and is not to be stated in remarks about decisions; and similarly in other cases. The new theory of meaning, like the old, points in the direction of a transcendental idealism, and shares also the problem of our being driven to state it in forms which are required to be understood, if at all, in the wrong way.
1 Hacker, p. 59.
2 This definition excludes Berkeley’s completed theory from being an example of empirical idealism. Yet clearly Kant was right in distinguishing Berkeley’s views from transcendental idealism. We need not, for the present purpose, pursue the important distinctions which are needed here.
3 I shall not try to discuss how that second fact is to be understood. For the closely related point that the ‘two languages’ version of phenomenalism is not neutral about reality, cf. J. L. Austin, Sense and Sensibilia (Oxford, 1962), pp. 60–1.
4 Cf. Moore’s objection to what he supposed to be a consequence of egoism in ethics:Principia Ethica (Cambridge, 1903), p. 99.
5 The references to the theory, like the references to Whorf, just function as a stand-in or dummy in the argument. I do not go into the difficulties that surround such a theory, such as that of independently characterising its explanandum.
6 Language, Belief and Metaphysics, ed. Kiefer and Munitz (SUNY Press, 1970), p. 60.
7 Itself, of course, an idealist view, in what I earlier called the ‘explanatory’ sense of the term.
8 G. Kreisel, ‘Wittgenstein’s Theory and Practice of Philosophy’, British Journal for the Philosophy of Science, xi (1960), pp. 238–52. Kreisel’s own use of the point goes further than anything suggested here, and in a rather different direction.
9 See M. Dummett, ‘Wittgenstein’s Philosophy of Mathematics’, Phil. Rev. (1959), reprinted in his Truth and Other Enigmas (London: Duck worth, 1978).
10 ‘Knowledge and Meaning in the Philosophy of Mind’, Phil. Rev., lxxv (1966), reprinted in Problems of the Self (Cambridge, 1973).
